=== 块 2 ===

e their way in the world without one. In order to introduce one of the thomy issues, let’s consider the set of all those numbers which can be easily described, say in fewer then twenty English words. This leads to something called Richard’s Paradox. The set {x : x is a number which can be described in fewer than twenty English words} must be ﬁnite since there are only ﬁnitely many English words. Now, there are inﬁnitely many counting numbers (i.e., the natural numbers) and so there must be some counting number (in fact inﬁnitely many of them) which are not in our set. So there is a smallest counting number which is not in the set. This number can be uniquely described as “the smallest counting number which cannot be described in fewer than twenty English words”. Count them—14 words. So the number must be in the set. But it can’t be in the set. That’s 9 a contradiction. What is wrong here. Our naive intuition about sets is wrong here. Not every collection of numbers with a description is a set. In fact it would be better to stay away from using languages like English to describe sets. Our ﬁrst task will be to build a new language for describing sets, one in which such contradictions cannot arise. We also need to clarify exactly what is meant by “set”. What is a set. We do not know the complete answer to this question. Many problems are still unsolved simply because we do not know whether or not certain objects constitute a set or not. Most of the proposed new axioms for Set Theory are of this nature. Nevertheless, there is much that we do know about sets and this book is the beginning of the story. 10 CHAPTER 0. INTRODUCTION Chapter 1 LOST We construct a language suitable for describing sets. The symbols: variables v0, v1, v2, . . . equality symbol = membership symbol ∈ logical connectives ∧, ∨, ¬, →, ↔ quantiﬁers ∀, ∃ parentheses (, ) The atomic formulas are strings of symbols of the form: (vi ∈vj) or (vi = vj) The collection of formulas of set theory is deﬁned as follows: 1. An atomic formula is a formula. 2. If Φ is any formula, then (¬Φ) is also a formula. 3. If Φ and Ψ are formulas, then (Φ ∧Ψ) is also a formula. 11 12 CHAPTER 1. LOST 4. If Φ and Ψ are formulas, then (Φ ∨Ψ) is also a formula. 5. If Φ and Ψ are formulas, then (Φ →Ψ) is also a formula. 6. If Φ and Ψ are formulas, then (Φ ↔Ψ) is also a formula. 7. If Φ is a formula and vi is a variable, then (∀vi)Φ is also a formula. 8. If Φ is a formula and vi is a variable, then (∃vi)Φ is also a formula. Furthermore, any formula is built up this way from atomic formulas and a ﬁnite number of applications of the inferences 2 through 8. Now that we have speciﬁed a language of set theory, we could specify a proof system. We will not do this here—see n diﬀerent logic books for n diﬀerent proof systems. However, these are essentially all the same— satisfying the completeness theorem (due to K. G¨odel) which essentially says that any formula either has a proof or it has an interpretation in which it is false (but not both!). In all these proof systems we have the usual logical equivalences which are common to everyday mathematics. For example: For any formulas Φ and Ψ: (¬(¬(Φ))) is equivalent to Φ; (Φ ∧Ψ) is equivalent to ¬((¬Φ) ∨(¬Ψ)); (Φ →Ψ) is equivalent to ((¬Φ) ∨Ψ); (Φ ↔Ψ) is equivalent to ((Φ →Ψ) ∧(Ψ →Φ)); (∃vi)Φ is equivalent to (¬(∀vi)(¬Φ)); and, (Φ ↔Ψ) is equivalent to (Ψ ↔Φ). The complete collection of subformulas of a formula Φ is deﬁned as fol- lows: 1. Φ is a subformula of Φ; 2. If (¬Ψ) is a subformula of Φ, then so is Ψ; 3. If (Θ ∧Ψ) is a subformula of Φ, then so are Θ and Ψ; 13 4. If (Θ ∨Ψ) is a subformula of Φ, then so are Θ and Ψ; 5. If (Θ →Ψ) is a subformula of Φ, then so are Θ and Ψ; 6. If (Θ ↔Ψ) is a subformula of Φ, then so are Θ and Ψ; 7. If (∀vi)Ψ is a subformula of Φ and vi is a variable, then Ψ is a subformula of Φ; and, 8. If (∃vi)Ψ is a subformula of Φ and vi is a variable, then Ψ is a subformula of Φ.