=== 块 1 ===

AN INTRODUCTION TO SET THEORY Professor William A. R. Weiss October 2, 2008 2 Contents 0 Introduction 7 1 LOST 11 2 FOUND 19 3 The Axioms of Set Theory 23 4 The Natural Numbers 31 5 The Ordinal Numbers 41 6 Relations and Orderings 53 7 Cardinality 59 8 There Is Nothing Real About The Real Numbers 65 9 The Universe 73 3 4 CONTENTS 10 Reﬂection 79 11 Elementary Submodels 89 12 Constructibility 101 13 Appendices 117 .1 The Axioms of ZFC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 .2 Tentative Axioms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118 CONTENTS 5 Preface These notes for a graduate course in set theory are on their way to be- coming a book. They originated as handwritten notes in a course at the University of Toronto given by Prof. William Weiss. Cynthia Church pro- duced the ﬁrst electronic copy in December 2002. James Talmage Adams produced the copy here in February 2005. Chapters 1 to 9 are close to ﬁ- nal form. Chapters 10, 11, and 12 are quite readable, but should not be considered as a ﬁnal draft. One more chapter will be added. 6 CONTENTS Chapter 0 Introduction Set Theory is the true study of inﬁnity. This alone assures the subject of a place prominent in human culture. But even more, Set Theory is the milieu in which mathematics takes place today. As such, it is expected to provide a ﬁrm foundation for the rest of mathematics. And it does—up to a point; we will prove theorems shedding light on this issue. Because the fundamentals of Set Theory are known to all mathemati- cians, basic problems in the subject seem elementary. Here are three simple statements about sets and functions. They look like they could appear on a homework assignment in an undergraduate course. 1. For any two sets X and Y , either there is a one-to-one function from X into Y or a one-to-one function from Y into X. 2. If there is a one-to-one function from X into Y and also a one-to-one function from Y into X, then there is a one-to-one function from X onto Y . 3. If X is a subset of the real numbers, then either there is a one-to-one function from the set of real numbers into X or there is a one-to-one function from X into the set of rational numbers. They won’t appear on an assignment, however, because they are quite dif- 7 8 CHAPTER 0. INTRODUCTION ﬁcult to prove. Statement (2) is true; it is called the Schroder-Bemstein Theorem. The proof, if you haven’t seen it before, is quite tricky but never- theless uses only standard ideas from the nineteenth century. Statement (1) is also true, but its proof needed a new concept from the twentieth century, a new axiom called the Axiom of Choice. Statement (3) actually was on a homework assignment of sorts. It was the ﬁrst problem in a tremendously inﬂuential list of twenty-three problems posed by David Hilbert to the 1900 meeting of the Intemational Congress of Mathematicians. Statement (3) is a reformulation of the famous Continuum Hypothesis. We don’t know if it is true or not, but there is hope that the twenty-ﬁrst century will bring a solution. We do know, however, that another new axiom will be needed here. All these statements will be discussed later in the book. Although Elementary Set Theory is well-known and straightforward, the modem subject, Axiomatic Set Theory, is both conceptually more diﬃcult and more interesting. Complex issues arise in Set Theory more than any other area of pure mathematics; in particular, Mathematical Logic is used in a fundamental way. Although the necessary logic is presented in this book, it would be beneﬁcial for the reader to have taken a prior course in logic under the auspices of mathematics, computer science or philosophy. In fact, it would be beneﬁcial for everyone to have had a course in logic, but most people seem to make their way in the world without one. In order to introduce one of the thomy issues, let’s consider the set of all those numbers which can be easily described, say in fewer then twenty English words.