=== 块 179 ===

is a structure
N ∈F suchthatdom(N )=aandwritinga =a∩dom(p )anda ∩dom(p ),
a a 0 0 1 1
N (cid:22) a = p (cid:22) a and N (cid:22) a = p (cid:22) a both hold. Let U be an ultrafilter on
a 0 0 0 1 1 1 1

188 CHAPTER 8. OTHER FORCINGS
[c]<ℵ0 such that for each finite set a ⊂ c the set {b: a ⊂ b} is in the ultrafilter
U. Let N be the structure on c which is the U-integral of the structures N . It
a
is immediate that N (cid:22)dom(p )=p and N (cid:22)p =p ; the closure of the Fraiss´e
0 0 1 1
class under substructures shows that N is a F-structure. It is the desired lower
bound of the conditions p ,p .
0 1
For (2), note that for each relation R in the language of the Fraiss´e class
F and every tuple a of virtual E-classes, it must be the case that either Q (cid:13)
τ (cid:13) a belongs to the relation R in the generic structure M˙ , or Q (cid:13) τ (cid:13) a
gen
does not to the relation R in the generic structure M˙ by the balance of the
gen
pair (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105). Let M be the structure on the virtual E-quotient space consisting
of those tuples for which the former alternative occurs. It is immediate that
Q×Coll(ω,(cid:105) ) (cid:13) τ ≤ τ in the separative quotient of the poset P. The
ω1 M
equivalence of the two pairs follows from Proposition 5.2.4.
Now,(3)isobvious. Forthelastsentence,supposethatp∈P isacondition.
For each finite set a⊂X∗∗, choose a structure N ∈F such that dom(N )=a
a a
and N
a
(cid:22)(dom(p)∩a)=p(cid:22)(dom(p)∩a). Let U be an ultrafilter on [X∗∗]<ℵ0
such that for each finite set a ⊂ X∗∗ the set {b: a ⊂ b} is in the ultrafilter U.
Let N be the structure on X∗∗ which is the U-integral of the structures N .
a
It is immediate that N (cid:22) dom(p) = p; the closure of the Fraiss´e class under
substructures shows that N is a F-structure. The pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,(cid:105) ),τ (cid:105) is a
ω1 N
balanced virtual condition below p.
Example 8.6.5. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space X.
LetP betheposetofalllinearorderingsoncountablesubsetsoftheE-quotient
space. The poset is designed to add a linear ordering on the quotient space.
Since the Fraiss´e class of finite linear orderings has the strong amalgamation
property, the poset P is balanced, and its balanced conditions are classified by
linear orders on the virtual E-quotient space.
Example8.6.6. LetE beaBorelequivalencerelationonaPolishspaceX. Let
P betheposetofalltournamentsoncountablesubsetsoftheE-quotientspace.
The poset is designed to add a tournament on the quotient space. Since the
Fraiss´e class of finite tournaments has the strong amalgamation property, the
poset P is balanced, and its balanced conditions are classified by tournaments
on the virtual E-quotient space.
The Fraiss´e posets can be viewed as a particularly well-behaved subclass of a
significantlylargerclassobtainedfromstandardamalgamationconstructionsin
model theory.
Definition8.6.7. LetT beacompletefirst-ordertheoryincountablelanguage,
withinfinitemodels. LetE beaBorelequivalencerelationonaPolishspaceX.
The poset P consists of structures p satisfying the theory T whose domain is
TE
a countable subset of the E-quotient space. The ordering is that of elementary
substructure: q ≤ p if the domain of p is a subset of the domain of q, and p is
an elementary substructure of q.