=== 块 212 ===

t p¯ be the virtual balanced condition in the
n n n
model M associated with the function f (cid:22)M by Theorem 6.6.6. The system
n n
(cid:104)M : n∈ω,p¯ : n≤ω(cid:105) is the sought nest below p.
n n

222 CHAPTER 9. PRESERVING CARDINALITIES
Corollary 9.4.15. Let E be a Borel pinned orbit equivalence relation on a
Polish space X.
1. Let P be the transversal poset of Example 6.6.8. In the P-extension of the
symmetric Solovay model, the orbit divide is preserved.
2. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, E
has a transversal, and the orbit divide is preserved.
Proof. This is a conjunction of Example 9.4.14 and Theorem 9.4.4.
The posets selecting a structure on each E-class for a countable Borel equiva-
lence relation E are always nested balanced by virtue of Example 9.4.14. The
following is a sample corollary.
Corollary 9.4.16. Let E be a countable Borel equivalence relation on a Polish
space X, with all orbits infinite.
1. Let P be the Z-action poset of Example 6.6.10. In the P-extension of the
symmetric Solovay model, the orbit divide is preserved.
2. ItisconsistentrelativetoaninaccessiblecardinalthatZF+DCholds, E is
induced as an orbit equivalence relation of a discontinuous Z-action, and
the orbit divide is preserved.
The determination of the nested balanced status of the posets adding a
maximal K-set for a Borel simplicial complex K is much more challenging. The
ultimatelimitationisthesurprisingCorollary9.4.30below,showinginZF+DC
that if R has a Hamel basis, then E has a complete countable section, and
1
therefore |E |≤|F | holds. Thus, we have to resort to partial results.
1 2
Example 9.4.17. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X with Borel
coloringnumberℵ . LetP =P betheposetofcountableΓ-anticliquesordered
1 Γ
by reverse inclusion. Then P is nested balanced.
Proof. Let p ∈ P be a condition; we must produce a nest below p ∈ P. Let
(cid:104)M : n∈ω(cid:105) be a choice-coherent sequence of generic extensions such that M
n 0
is an extension of the ground model by proper forcing, and for all n∈ω the set
2ω∩M \M isnonempty. Wewillshowthatthereisasequence(cid:104)p : n∈ω(cid:105)
n n+1 n
of balanced conditions satisfying the demands of Definition 9.4.1.
Theorem 6.3.3 classified the balanced conditions in the poset P in terms of
weakly maximal Γ-anticliques. Thus, it will be enough to produce a set A⊂X
in the model M which contains p as a subset and such that for each n ≤ ω,
0
the set A∩M belongs to M and is a weakly maximal Γ-anticlique there. To
n n
cut the notational clutter, we ignore the condition p ∈ P. Let (cid:126)Γ be a Borel
orientationofΓsuchthatthe(cid:126)Γ-outflowo(y)ofeveryvertexy ∈X iscountable.
Consider the set B ⊂ X of all points x ∈ X for which there is a countable set
a⊂X such that