=== 块 256 ===

sets of P and positive
nm nm n
rational numbers witnessing the measured property of P . For each n,m ∈ ω
n
let B ⊂P be the set {(cid:104)p,n(cid:105)∈P : p∈A }. It is immediate that the sets
nm ω ω nm

11.3. ITERATION THEOREMS 269
B with the numbers ε witness the Suslin measured property of the limit
nm nm
P .
ω
A routine transfinite induction argument now completes the proof.
Theorem 11.3.18. The finite support product of countably many very Suslin,
Suslin measured posets, if very Suslin, is Suslin measured.
Proof. Let P for n ∈ ω be the very Suslin posets, with their Suslin measured
n
property witnessed by sets A ⊂ P and numbers ε for m ∈ ω. Consider
nm n nm
(cid:81)
the finite support product Q = P and assume it is very Suslin. For each
n n
function h ∈ ω<ω let B = {q ∈ Q: dom(q) = dom(h)∧∀m ∈ dom(q) q(m) ∈
h
(cid:81)
A , and let ε = ε }. It is not difficult to verify that the
m,h(m) h m∈dom(h) m,h(m)
sets B and the numbers ε witness the Suslin measured property of the poset
h h
Q.
As the last issue in this section, we elaborate on a notion which has been used
inseveralcontextstoguaranteethatvariousposetsdonotadddominatingreals
[70, 1]; we will use it for a different purpose.
Definition 11.3.19. Let P be a Suslin poset.
1. A set A ⊂ P is liminf-centered if for every collection {p : n ∈ ω} ⊂ A
n
there is a condition q ∈ P such that every condition stronger than q is
compatible with p for infinitely many numbers n∈ω;
n
(cid:83)
2. P is Suslin σ-liminf centered if P = A where each set A ⊂ P is
n n n
analytic and liminf-centered.
It is not difficult to see that the property of the condition q demanded by the
first item of the definition can be stated in the forcing language as q (cid:13) there
are infinitely many n ∈ ω such that p belongs to the generic filter. It is
n
important and instructive to note that if P is a very Suslin c.c.c. poset then its
Suslin σ-liminf-centeredness will persist to all generic extensions. To see this,
it is enough to observe that for an analytic set A ⊂ P, the statement “A is
liminf-centered”isΠ1; then,anapplicationofShoenfieldabsolutenessgivesthe
2
required conclusion. Now, the statement “A is liminf-centered” is equivalent to
the following: for all (cid:104)p : n ∈ ω(cid:105), either for some n ∈ ω, p ∈/ A, or there is
n n
q ∈P suchthatq (cid:13)thereareinfinitelymanyn∈ω suchthatp belongstothe
n
generic filter. The forcing statement is analytic by Proposition 11.2.9 and the
very Suslin assumption on P. Thus, the total statement is Π1 as required.
2
Theorem 11.3.20. Let P be a very Suslin c.c.c. forcing which is Suslin σ-
liminf centered. Let α∈ω be a countable ordinal. Then the finite support of P
1
of length α is a very Suslin c.c.c. Suslin σ-liminf centered forcing.
Proof. Theargumentisaroutinevariationoftheproofsofpreviouspreservation
theorems.