=== 块 307 ===

dding
j, M |= there is a condition p∈D such that {p}∪C is centered; in particular,
{p}∪B is centered as desired.
The following examples all use the Woodin cardinal assumption which is not
spelled out.

322 CHAPTER 12. THE SILVER DIVIDE
Example 12.4.4. LetX beaPolishvectorspaceoveracountablefield. There
isabasisgenericoverL(R)fortheposetP ofExample6.4.9. Thisfollowsfrom
Theorem12.4.2andTheorem??(1): everycenteredsubsetofP yieldsalinearly
independent set, which can be extended to a maximal linearly independent set.
AmaximallinearlyindependentsetyieldsaBernsteinbalancedconditionwhere
E is simply the identity on 2ω.
Example 12.4.5. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X. There is a
maximal acyclic subgraph ∆ ⊂ Γ generic over L(R) for the poset P of Exam-
ple6.4.10.ThisfollowsfromTheorem12.4.2andTheorem??(2): everycentered
subset of P yields an acyclic subset of Γ, which can be extended to a maximal
acyclic set. A maximal acyclic set yields a Bernstein balanced condition where
E is simply the identity on 2ω.
Example 12.4.6. Let E be a pinned Borel equivalence relation on a Polish
space X. There is a linear ordering on the E-quotient space generic over L(R)
for the poset P of Example 8.6.5. This follows from Theorem 12.4.2 and Theo-
rem8.6.4: everycenteredsubsetofP yieldsapartialorderingontheE-quotient
space, which can be extended to a linear order. A linear ordering on the E-
quotientspaceyieldsaBernsteinbalancedcondition,bythepinnedassumption
on E and Theorem 8.6.4.
Example 12.4.7. LetE,F bepinnedBorelequivalencerelationsonrespective
Polish spaces X,Y with uncountably many classes each. There is an injection
from the E-quotient to the F-quotient space generic over L(R) for the poset of
Definition 6.6.2. This follows from Theorem 12.4.2 and Theorem 6.6.3: every
centered subset of P of size < c yields a partial injection from the E-quotient
to the F-quotient space and also a set of F-classes which are the forbidden
values, both of size < c. A counting argument provides a total injection from
the E-quotient to the F-quotient space extending the given one and avoiding
the given set of forbidden values. Such an injection yields a Bernstein balanced
condition by Theorem 6.6.3, where G=E×F.
Many other examples can be produced by the observation that the class of soft
forcings is closed under countable product. The nonexamples are perhaps more
interesting than the examples.
Example 12.4.8. Let P be the P(ω) modulo finite poset. It is not Bernstein
balancedbyTheorem12.2.3above. TheP-extensionofL(R)containsaRamsey
ultrafilter on ω, in particular a P-point. At the same time, it is consistent [82]
and occurs in the product Silver model [18] that there are no P-points on ω. In
such circumstances, there cannot be a filter on P generic over L(R).
Example 12.4.9. Let P be the Lusin poset of Definition 8.8.5. It is not Bern-
stein balanced by Theorem 12.2.6 above. The P-extension of L(R) contains a
Lusin subset of 2ω. At the same time, the negation of Martin’s Axiom and the
negationofthecontinuumhypothesisimpliesthateverysetofsizeℵ ismeager
1
??? and so no Lusin set exists. In such circumstances, there cannot be a filter
on P generic over L(R).