=== 块 248 ===

set of
X2. To ease the notational clutter, in this section we only require that ≤ is
a transitive relation on P containing the diagonal. In addition, the poset P is
required to have a largest element.

11.2. VERY SUSLIN FORCINGS 261
A given Suslin poset (cid:104)P,≤(cid:105) can be reinterpreted in every forcing extension.
Note that the demands on the analytic definitions of ≤ and ⊥ are Π1 and so
2
the reinterpretation is again a Suslin poset. Importantly, the c.c.c. property of
Suslin forcings persists to forcing extensions.
Fact 11.2.2. [44] Let (cid:104)P,≤(cid:105) be a Suslin c.c.c. poset. The reinterpretation of P
in any forcing extension is c.c.c.
Onehastoenterthemuchmorerestrictiveclassofvery Suslin forcings toguar-
antee that the finite support iterations, separative quotients, and completions
have desirable descriptive properties.
Definition11.2.3. SupposethatP isaSuslinc.c.c.posetonanambientPolish
space X. The poset is very Suslin if the set {a∈Pω: rng(a) is predense in P}
is an analytic subset of Xω.
Note that being a very Suslin partial order is a Π1 statement in the code for
2
the analytic set of maximal antichains and therefore absolute among all forcing
extensions. Note that if the poset P and the ordering ≤ are Borel, which is
the case for all applications in this book and elsewhere as well, then both the
incompatibility relation and the set of maximal antichains are coanalytic and
therefore Borel by the Suslin theorem.
Example 11.2.4. The Cohen forcing, random forcing, and the eventually dif-
ferent real forcing are very Suslin.
Proof. TheSuslinityofthedefinitionoftheposetsiselementaryandleftforthe
reader to check; we only verify the very Suslin property. The Cohen forcing is
the poset P of finite binary strings ordered by reverse inclusion. A set a⊂P is
predense if every condition in P is compatible with some element of a, which in
view of the fact that P is countable is a Borel condition. If the random forcing
P is realized as the collection of compact µ-positive mass subsets of X ordered
by inclusion, where µ is some Borel probability measure on a Polish space X,
(cid:83)
thenacountableseta⊂P ispre-densejustincaseµ( a)=1,whichisaBorel
condition. The case of the eventually different real forcing is somewhat more
involved, and addressed in [101, Proposition 3.8.12].
Example 11.2.5. The Hechler forcing is Suslin c.c.c. but not very Suslin.
The Suslinness and c.c.c. of Hechler forcing are well-known and easily checked.
The failure of the the very Suslin property follows from the basic distinction
between Suslin and very Suslin c.c.c. posets: the latter cannot add dominating
reals.
Proposition 11.2.6. Let P be a very Suslin c.c.c. forcing. Then P does not
add dominating reals.
Proof. Let p ∈ P and τ be a P-name for an element of ωω. Consider the set
A = {T ⊂ ω<ω: some q ≤ p forces Tˇ to have no infinite branch modulo finite