=== 块 230 ===

of its kind, as the following
observation shows.
Theorem 10.2.4. Let E be an unpinned Borel equivalence relation on a Polish
space X. Then E-uniformization fails in balanced extensions of the Solovay

242 CHAPTER 10. UNIFORMIZATION
model.
Proof. Let W[G] be a balanced extension of the Solovay model. For each pa-
rameter z ∈ 2ω the model M = HOD is well-ordered and therefore by
z V,z,G
Theorem 9.1.1, it is a well-ordered subclass of W and so an extension of V by
a poset < κ. The Borel equivalence relation E is unpinned in M by Theo-
z
rem 2.7.1. By Theorem 2.6.3, M |=there is a nontrivial E-pinned name on the
z
poset Coll(ω,ω
1
). Note that (P(ω
1
))Mz is a countable set in W. Thus, one
can successfully define the set B ⊂ 2ω ×X by setting (cid:104)z,x(cid:105) ∈ B if there is a
filter g ⊂ Coll(ω,ωMz) generic over M such that τ /g E x, where τ is the
1 z z z
first E-unpinned name in the canonical well-ordering of the model M . Every
z
vertical section of the set B then consists of precisely one E-equivalence class.
Tosee thatthe set B cannotbe uniformized, note thateveryP-name inthe
model W is definable from a real parameter and some additional parameters
in the ground model, and therefore every element of W[G] is definable from
a real parameter, the generic filter G, and some additional parameters in the
ground model. Thus, if f: 2ω → X is a putative uniformization of the set B,
onecanfindarealparameterz ∈2ω suchthatf isdefinablefromz,Gandsome
elements of the ground model. Then f(z) should be an element of the model
M by the definition of the model M . At the same time, the vertical sections
z z
B contains no elements of M by the definition of the set B.
z z
10.3 Well-orderable uniformization
In this section, we will prove that a strong version of the countable-to-one uni-
formization statement holds in the extensions of the Solovay model by tethered
forcings.
Definition 10.3.1. Let E be an equivalence relation on a Polish space X.
E-well-orderable uniformization is the statement: if E is a Borel equivalence
relation on a Polish space X and B ⊂ 2ω ×X is a set, then the following are
equivalent:
1. for every y ∈2ω, B is a union of a well-orderable collection of E-classes;
y
2. B = (cid:83) B where for each ordinal α, B ⊂ 2ω ×X is a set whose verti-
α α α
cal sections are either empty or E-classes and the variable α ranges over
ordinals.
Clearly, only the implication (1)→(2) has nontrivial content. As a very special
case,onecanconsiderasetB ⊂2ω×X withallverticalsectionscountableand
E the identity on X. Then (2) yields in particular a function uniformizing the
setB: foreachy withB nonemptyfindtheleastα=α forwhichthevertical
y y
section (B ) is nonempty and then let f(y) = x for the unique x ∈ X such
α y
that (cid:104)y,x(cid:105)∈B . This is the familiar countable-to-one uniformization.
αy
ThecentraltheoremofthissectioncannowbestatedusingConvention1.7.16.