=== 块 43 ===

-pin presented in Example ??: the pin corresponding to the name for a
2
generic enumeration of 2ω in ordertype ω. This follows immediately from the
classification of F -pins in Example 2.3.5 below.
2

42 CHAPTER 2. THE VIRTUAL REALM
2.3 Classification: general theorems
Inthissection,weprovideanumberofgeneralclassificationtheoremsforvirtual
equivalence classes. The theorems are all of the same type: if F is an analytic
equivalencerelationwhichisobtainedfromanotherequivalencerelationE using
a certain operation, then all virtual F-classes are obtained from virtual E-
classesusingasimilaroperation. Thiswillprovideasuitablebackgroundtothe
investigation of specific cases in Section 2.4.
To start with, a great many analytic equivalence relations yield only utterly
uninteresting virtual classes: only those already realized in the ground model.
This phenomenon is isolated in the following definition.
Definition 2.3.1. [48, Definition 17.1.2] Let E be an analytic equivalence re-
lation on a Polish space X. A virtual E-class represented by (cid:104)P,τ(cid:105) is trivial if
there is x∈X such that P (cid:13)τ E xˇ. The equivalence relation E is pinned if it
has only trivial virtual classes.
The class of pinned equivalence relations has been investigated for a number
of years. The basic pre-existing knowledge about this class is subsumed in the
following fact.
Fact 2.3.2. [48, Theorem 17.1.3] The analytic equivalence relations in the fol-
lowing classes are pinned:
1. orbit equivalence relations generated by actions of Polish cli groups;
2. Borel equivalence relations with all classes Σ0;
3
3. equivalence relations Borel reducible to pinned ones.
The operation on equivalence relations which has the most informative transla-
tion into virtual classes is that of the Friedman–Stanley jump.
Definition 2.3.3. Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space
X. The Friedman–Stanley jump of E is the equivalence relation E+ on the
space Y =Xω defined by y E+ y if [rng(y )] =[rng(y )] .
0 1 0 E 1 E
Here, the classification of pinned names is right at hand: a pinned name for
the jump is essentially just a set of pinned names for the original equivalence
relation. For a nonempty set S = {(cid:104)P ,τ (cid:105): i ∈ I} of representatives of virtual
i i
(cid:81)
E-classes, let τ be the name on the poset Q = P × Coll(ω,I) for an
S S i i
element of Xω enumerating the set {τ : i∈I}.
i
Theorem 2.3.4. Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space
X.
1. If S is a set of E-pinned names then (cid:104)Q ,τ (cid:105) is an E+-pinned name;
S S
2. (cid:104)Q ,τ (cid:105) E¯+ (cid:104)Q ,τ (cid:105) iff the sets S,T represent the same set of virtual
S S T T
E-classes;