=== 块 332 ===

Theorem 8.4.3, and it is definable from a real.
Example 14.4.4. Let P be the partial ordering introducing a nontrivial au-
tomorphism of the algebra P(ω) modulo finite as in Section 8.3. As proved in

350 CHAPTER 14. OTHER COMBINATORICS
Theorem 8.3.3, the balanced virtual conditions are classified precisely by auto-
morphismsofthealgebra. Atthesametime,everycondition(anautomorphism
of a countable subalgebra) can be extended into a total automorphism which is
trivial, i.e. generated by a bijection between cofinite subsets of ω [9, Theorem
2.3]. Such a total automorphism is clearly definable from a real.
Example 14.4.5. Let Γ be the clopen graph on 2ω connecting points x (cid:54)=x
0 1
if the smallest number n such that x (n)(cid:54)=x (n) is even. Let P be the partial
0 1
order of Example 12.2.16 forcing a failure of OCA by adding an uncountable
subset of 2ω containing no uncountable Γ-clique or Γ-anticlique. For every
condition p ∈ P (which is a pair (cid:104)a ,b (cid:105) where a ⊂ 2ω is a countable set and
p p p
b is a countable collection of closed Γ-cliques and closed Γ-anticliques) one can
p
find a balanced virtual condition p¯≤ p represented by the pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,2ω),τ(cid:105)
where τ is the name for the pair (cid:104)a ,¯b (cid:105) where ¯b is the set of all closed Γ-
p p p
cliques and all closed Γ-anticliques coded in the ground model. This is indeed
a balanced pair below p as shown in Example 12.2.16 and it is definable from a
real.
The preservation theorems we prove are best organized with a well-known fac-
torization fact and its corollary.
Fact14.4.6. LetQbethefinitesupportproductofω -manycopiesoftheCohen
1
forcing. Let G⊂Q be a generic filter.
1. Whenever x∈V[G] is an element of 2ω, V[G] is a Q-extension of V[x].
2. Suppose that X,Y are Polish spaces in V, E is a pinned Borel equivalence
relation on Y coded in V. In V[G], if x ∈ X is a point and c ⊂ Y is an
E-class definable from x and some elements of the ground model, then c
has a representative in V[x].
The following results are stated using Convention 1.7.16.
Theorem 14.4.7. In definably balanced extensions of the symmetric Solovay
model, whenever Γ is an analytic hypergraph of countable, possibly infinite ar-
ity on a Polish space X of uncountable Borel chromatic number, then Γ has
uncountable chromatic number.
Proof. InviewofthedichotomytheoremforuncountableBorelchromaticnum-
berofanalytichypergraphsofcountablearity[66]itisenoughtoverifythatthe
conclusion of the theorem holds for a specific analytic hypergraph Γ. Let X be
the dense G subspace of ωω consisting of all functions x∈ωω such that for in-
δ
finitelymanyn∈ω,x(n)>x(m)forallm∈n. Let{s : n∈ω}beacollection
n
of finite strings of natural numbers such that s ∈ ωn and {s : n ∈ ω} ⊂ ω<ω
n n
isdense. DefinethehypergraphΓtoconsistofalltuples(cid:104)x : m∈ω(cid:105)suchthat
m
there is n ∈ ω such that s is an initial segment of all points x , x (n) = m
n m m
holds for all m, and the tails x (cid:22)(n,ω) are the same for all m∈ω. [66] shows
m
that the graph Γ has uncountable Borel chromatic numbers and moreover, it