=== 块 147 ===

6, the balanced conditions are classified by F-transversals.
Example 6.6.9. Aposetintroducingacompletecountablesectiontoapinned
Borel equivalence relation G on a Polish space Y. Let X =Yω and let B ⊂X

154 CHAPTER 6. SIMPLICIAL COMPLEX FORCINGS
betheBorelsetofallelementsx∈X whoserangeconsistsofpairwiseG-related
points. Let F be the Borel equivalence relation on X connecting points x ,x
0 1
if either they are equal or else they are both in B and their ranges are subsets
of the same G-class. Let E = F ∩F. It is not difficult to check that E ⊂ F
2
are Borel equivalence relations on X and F is pinned. Consider the associated
E,F-transversal poset. The generic set is a countable complete section of the
relationE. InviewofthefactthatvirtualF -classesareclassifiedbynonempty
2
subsets of Y, Theorem 6.6.6 says that the balanced conditions are classified by
arbitrary sets A⊂Y which have nonempty intersection with every G-class.
Numerous examples of uniformization posets arise in the context of countable
Borel equivalence relations. If E is a countable Borel equivalence relation on
a Polish space Y and P is a poset adding a choice of a structure of some type
oneachE-classwithcountableapproximations, thenP canberepresentedasa
transversal poset in the sense of Definition 6.6.5. The following example spells
out the details.
Example 6.6.10. Let G be a countable Borel equivalence relation on a Polish
space Y with all equivalence classes infinite. Let P be the poset of all count-
able functions on the G-quotient space assigning to each equivalence class a
Z-ordering on it; the poset P serves to introduce a (discontinuous) Z-action on
Y such that G is its orbit equivalence relation. It is not difficult to cast P as a
transversalposetinthesenseofDefinition6.6.5. LetX =(Y2)ω andletB ⊂X
be the Borel set of all elements x ∈ X which enumerate a linear ordering of a
whole single G-class of ordertype Z. Let F be the equivalence relations on X
connecting points x ,x ∈ X if either they are equal or else they both belong
0 1
to B and enumerate a linear ordering of the same G-class. Let E =F ∩F. It
2
is not difficult to check that both E,F are pinned Borel equivalence relations.
Consider the associated E,F-transversal poset. The generic set selects one Z-
typeorderingforeachG-class. Theorem6.6.6saysthatthebalancedconditions
are classified by all functions f assigning each G-class a linear ordering of its
elements isomorphic to Z.
Example 6.6.11. Let X = ((2ω)ω)2 and consider the Borel set B ⊂ X con-
sisting of all pairs (cid:104)y ,y (cid:105) ∈ X such that rng(x )∩rng(x ) = 0. Let F be
0 1 0 1
the equivalence relation connecting points (cid:104)y ,y (cid:105) and (cid:104)z ,z (cid:105) if they are either
0 1 0 1
equal or both in B and y F z . Let E be the equivalence relation F ×F
0 2 0 2 2
intersected with F. The resulting E,F-transversal poset is designed to add a
functionassigningtoeachnonemptycountablesetasinglenonemptycountable
set disjoint from it. However, the equivalence relation F is not pinned and so
Theorem6.6.6doesnotapplytoshowthattheuniformizationposetisbalanced.
Indeed, in ZF one can prove that existence of a maximal K -set implies the
E,F
existenceofanω -sequenceofpairwisedistinctE-classes. Toseethis,letA⊂X
1
besuchamaximalset,supposec ⊂2ω isanarbitrarynonemptycountableset,
0
andbytransfiniterecursiononα∈ω definec astheuniquenonemptycount-
1 α
(cid:83)
able set such that for some enumerations y of c and y of c it is the
0 β∈α β 1 α
case that (cid:104)y ,y ∈ B. It is clear that the sets c for α ∈ ω are nonempty and
0 1 α 1