=== 块 249 ===

.c. forcing. Then P does not
add dominating reals.
Proof. Let p ∈ P and τ be a P-name for an element of ωω. Consider the set
A = {T ⊂ ω<ω: some q ≤ p forces Tˇ to have no infinite branch modulo finite

262 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
dominated by τ}. By the evaluation of the complexity of the forcing relation
in Proposition 11.2.9 below, A is an analytic set of trees. At the same time, if
p forces τ ∈ ωω to be a dominating real, then A is the set of all well-founded
trees, which is coanalytic and not analytic. Since the conclusion is impossible,
the assumption must be false as well. The proposition follows.
ThemainfeatureoftheclassofverySuslinc.c.c.posetsisthatitisinasuitable
precise sense closed under finite support iterations of countable length.
Theorem 11.2.7. Let α∈ω be a countable ordinal and P a very Suslin c.c.c.
1
forcing. The finite support iteration of P of length α is naturally isomorphic to
a very Suslin c.c.c. forcing.
WeemphasisethatnosuchiterationresultispossibleforgeneralSuslinforcings.
The complexity of the forcing relation on e.g. the Hechler forcing causes the
complexity of the iterated posets to explode in ways that are unmanageable
without large cardinal assumptions. In order to prove the iteration theorem for
very Suslin c.c.c. posets succintly, we need several preliminary definitions and
facts.
Definition 11.2.8. Suppose that P is a very Suslin c.c.c. poset and X is a
Polish space.
1. Alayered P-name foranelementofX isatupleτ =(cid:104)A ,f : n∈ω(cid:105)such
n n
that A ⊂ P is a maximal antichain, f is a map from A to basic open
n n n
subsets of X of radius < 2−n, and if m < n then A refines A and if
m n
p ∈A and p ∈A are such that p ≤p , then the closure of f (p )
n n m m m n m m
is a subset of f (p ).
n n
2. XP is the set of all layered P-names for elements of X.
Note that the set XP is analytic in a suitable ambient space. The definition of
XP appears to depend on the choice of the metric for X, a dependence that we
happily suppress. It is clear that for every name for an element of the space X
there is a layered name which is forced to be equal to the original name. Now
we are ready to show that the forcing relation of very Suslin c.c.c. forcings is
Σ1 on Σ1 in a precise sense.
1 1
Proposition11.2.9. SupposethatP isaverySuslinc.c.c.poset, X isaPolish
space, and A⊂X is an analytic set. The set {(cid:104)p,τ(cid:105)∈P ×XP: p(cid:13)τ ∈A˙} is
an analytic subset of P ×XP.
Proof. Letτ =(cid:104)A ,f : n∈ω(cid:105). Leth: ωω →Abeacontinuoussurjection. The
n n
statement p(cid:13)τ ∈A˙ is equivalent to the existence of a system (cid:104)B ,g : n∈ω(cid:105)
n n
where for each n ∈ ω, B is a maximal antichain of P of conditions which are
n
either below p or incompatible with p, g : B → ω<ω, B refines B and
n n n+1 n
A , whenever r ≤ q are conditions in B and B respectively then g (r)
n n+1 n n+1
properly extends g (q), and if r ≤ q is an element of B below p and an
n n+1
element of A respectively then [g (r)] ⊂ h−1f (q). This is an analytic
n n+1 n
statement.