=== 块 271 ===

rtition value cannot be of
the form (cid:104)u,v,1(cid:105) since then the points c where i ranges over the first n many
iu
elements of a, and c where j ranges over the second n-many elements of a,
jv

284 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
form an injective homomorphic copy of K in Γ, contradicting the initial
n,n
assumptionsonΓ. Thus,thehomogeneouscoloris∞,whichpreciselysaysthat
(cid:83)
c isafunctionwhichisaΓ-coloringandthereforeacommonlowerbound
i∈a i
of the conditions c for i∈a.
i
Finally, we are ready to prove some preservation results.
Theorem 11.5.6. Let Γ be a Borel hypergraph on a Polish space X contain-
ing no injective homomorphic image of K→ and K for some n ∈ ω. Let
ω,ω n,ω1
∆ be a Borel graph which does not have Borel σ-finite clique number. In the
P -extension of the symmetric Solovay model, the chromatic number of ∆ is
Γ
uncountable.
Proof. By Fact 11.1.26 it is enough to prove this for the graph ∆ on ωω which
is the skew product of countably many cliques on ω. Write also P = P and
Γ
K = K . Let κ be an inaccessible cardinal, let W be the symmetric Solovay
Γ
model derived from κ, and work in W. Suppose that p ∈ P is a condition
and τ is a P-name such that p (cid:13) τ: ωω → ω is a function. We must find a
condition p¯ ≤ p, ∆-connected points y ,y ∈ ωω and a number m such that
0 1
p¯(cid:13)τ(y )=τ(y )=mˇ.
0 1
Strengthening the condition p if necessary, we may assume that whenever
x for i ∈ n are distinct elements of dom(p) and y ∈ X is a point Γ-connected
i
to them all, then y ∈ dom(p) holds. The condition p and the name τ are all
definable in the model W from ground model parameters and som additional
parameter z ∈ 2ω. Let V[K] be an intermediate model obtained by forcing of
size less than κ such that z ∈ V[K] and work in V[K]. Consider the iteration
Q∗R˙ where Q is the Cohen forcing Q on ωω, and R˙ is (forced to be) the finite
supportiterationoflengthω whoseiterandsaretheposetsKevaluatedintheir
1
respective models. Let M denote the model obtained after the initial segment
α
of the iteration R˙ of length α and let η be the union of the generic filter on K
α
at the α-th stage of the iteration. Thus, R forces η to be a Γ-coloring on the
α
domain X∩M .
α
Tosmoothoutthevariouscoloringsη toasingletotalΓ-coloringextending
α
p, we need a small claim:
(cid:83)
Claim 11.5.7. Let y ∈ X ∩M \ M be a point. Then the set {x ∈
α β∈α β
(cid:83)
X∩ M : xΓy} has size less than n.
β∈α β
Proof. If this failed, then (regardless of whether α is limit or successor) there
would be a fixed ordinal β ∈ α and pairwise distinct points x ∈ X ∩M for
i β
i∈nsuchthatx Γy holdsforalli∈n. Butthen,bytheinitialassumptionon
i
Γ the set of all points simultaneously connected to all x for i∈n is countable,
i
coded in M , and so a subset of M . This means that y ∈ M , contradicting
β β β
the initial assumptions on the point y.
Let {b : k ∈ω} be a recursive partition of ω into infinite sets. Now, define the
k
Q∗R˙-nameσ foratotalΓ-coloringbythefollowingrecursiveformula. σ (cid:22)M is
0
definedforapointy ∈M sothatify ∈dom(p)thenσ(y)=p(y);ify ∈/ dom(p)
0