=== 块 46 ===

ween the models
M[g ,g ] and V for i (cid:54)= j ∈ I, the elements τ/g ∈ X for i ∈ I are pairwise
i j i
F-related, but pairwise E-unrelated, contradicting the initial assumptions on
the relations E,F.

2.4. CLASSIFICATION: SPECIFIC EXAMPLES 45
Example 2.3.12. The Clemens jump survives into the virtual realm without
change. HeretheClemensjumpofananalyticequivalencerelationEonaPolish
space X is the equivalence relation E+C on Y = XZ connecting y ,y ∈ Y if
0 1
thereisn∈Zsuchthatforeverym∈Zy (m)E y (m+n). TheClemensjump
0 1
is countable over the product of Z-many copies of E, which yields a complete
analysis of its virtual classes by Theorems 2.3.7 and 2.3.8. In particular, if E is
pinned, then so is its Clemens jump.
2.4 Classification: specific examples
There are many analytic equivalence relations for which the virtual space can
be classified by more tangible combinatorial objects, but which do not fit into
the context of the theorems of Section 2.3. The purpose of this section is to
investigate these more difficult, but also more informative, possibilities.
Themostinterestingissuesariseinequivalencerelationsclassifiablebycount-
ablestructures. Amongthese,theBorelequivalencerelationsareBorelreducible
to an iterated jump of the identity [48, Theorem 12.5.2], so can be handled by
Theorems 2.3.4 and 2.3.8. For example, for all equivalence relations E Borel
reducible to F , the virtual E-classes are classifiable by subsets of 2ω by Exam-
2
ple 2.3.5.
More interesting issues arise with analytic equivalence relations. Let E be
the equivalence relation of isomorphism of structures on ω. In this case, the
virtual classes correspond to potential Scott sentences in the sense of [96]. In
somecases,itispossibletoclassifyvirtualclassesofEbyuncountablestructures
as in the following definition.
Definition 2.4.1. Let M be a (possibly uncountable) structure of a countable
signature. τ is a Coll(ω,M)-name for some structure on ω isomorphic to M.
M
Itisimmediatethatthepair(cid:104)Coll(ω,M),τ (cid:105)isanE-pin,anditsE¯-equivalence
M
relationdoesnotdependonthechoiceofthenameτ . ItturnsoutthattheE¯-
M
equivalencerelationontheE-pinsobtainedinthiswaycoincideswithafamiliar
concept of model theory:
Definition 2.4.2. [67, Section 2.4] Let M,N be structures with the same sig-
nature. Say that M,N are Ehrenfeucht–Fraiss´e-equivalent if Player II has a
winning strategy in the Ehrenfeucht–Fraiss´e game. In the EF-game, the two
players take turns, at round i∈ω Player I starting with an element n ∈N or
i
m ∈ M and Player II responding with an element m ∈ M or n ∈ N respec-
i i 1
tively. After all rounds indexed by i∈ω have been completed, Player II wins if
the map n (cid:55)→m for i∈ω preserves all relations and functions of N,M in the
i i
signature.
Theorem 2.4.3. Let M,N be models with the same countable signature. The
following are equivalent:
1. M,N are Ehrenfeucht–Fraiss´e equivalent;