=== 块 240 ===

0
in the open
set q simultaneously, an impossibility.
Therearealsopartialorderswhereweareunabletodecidethestatusoftether,
such as the Fin×Fin poset of Definition 7.2.1.

252 CHAPTER 10. UNIFORMIZATION

Chapter 11
Locally countable structures
ThischapterintroducesamethodologyforprovingthatcertainmodelsofZF+DC
weproducedonotcontainlocallycountablestructuresofcertaintype. Inpartic-
ular,welearnhowtoproducemodelsofZF+DCwhichcontainlocallycountable
structures of one type but not of another type. The whole enterprise should be
viewed as a parallel to the extensive field of descriptive set theory of locally
countable structures. There are many striking similarities present, and many
others are sure to be found in the future.
11.1 Central objects and notions
In this section, we introduce certain basic locally countable graphs and hy-
pergraphs and the associated concerns of the descriptive set theory of locally
countable structures. Some of the critical issues deal with the comparison of
chromaticandBorelchromaticnumbersofvariousanalytichypergraphsonPol-
ish spaces. An analytic hypergraph on a Polish space X is a set G ⊂ [X]<ℵ0
which is an analytic subset of the hyperspace K(X) with the Vietoris topology.
The elements of a hypergraph are referred to as hyperedges. Thus, our hyper-
graphs contain finite hyperedges only–they are finitary; it may occur though
that there is no fixed n ∈ ω (arity) such that G ⊂ [X]n. As a matter of con-
vention, our hypergraphs contain no singleton sets. A graph is a hypergraph of
arity2. IfG,H arehypergraphsonrespectvespacesX,Y,afunctionh: X →Y
is a homomorphism if the h-image of any G-hyperedge is an H-hyperedge. An
anticlique is a set a⊂X such that [a]<ℵ0∩G=0. The chromatic number of G
is the smallest cardinality of a set of anticliques covering the whole space X; in
the choiceless context, where cardinalities are not well-ordered, we distinguish
onlybetweencountableanduncountablechromaticnumberanddifferentvalues
of countable chromatic numbers.
Most of the central analytic hypergraphs in this section are in fact products
of hypergraphs on finite or countable domain. The following definition explains
the typical construction.
253