=== 块 263 ===

∈/ n holds.
(Such a coloring d can be completed by coloring the rest of the class c with the
first n many colors, which is possible by the chromatic number assumption on
G.) This is a Borel condition.

276 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
To prove the Suslin σ-centeredness of the simplicial complex K, use the
Lusin–NovikovtheoremtofindaBorelfunctiong which,foreachfinitecoloring
a ∈ K whose domain consists of elements of a single E-class c, assigns a G-
coloring g(a) ⊃ a such that dom(a) ⊂ dom(g(a)) ⊂ c and for every G-edge
{x,y} with x∈dom(g(a)) and y ∈c\dom(g(a)) it is the case that g(a)(u)∈/ n
holds. Let supp(a) be the set of all pairs (cid:104)e,i(cid:105) such that e ∈ dom(g(a)) and
i ∈ 2n − 1. In view of Theorem 11.4.6, it will be enough to show that if
{a : i∈j} are colorings in K whose domain is a subset of one and the same E-
i
(cid:83)
class c, with pairwise disjoint supports, then a ∈ K. This is nearly trivial,
i i
however. The colorings g(a ) for i ∈ j have pairwise disjoint domains. Let
i
(cid:83)
f: c\ dom(g(a )) → n be any G-coloring–its existence is guaranteed by the
i i
(cid:83)
chromatic number assumption on G. Then, f ∪ g(a ) is a G-coloring of
i i
(cid:83)
the class c which extends a and uses no colors ≥ n infinitely many times,
i i
(cid:83)
witnessing that a ∈K.
i i
Corollary 11.4.10. LetGbealocallyfiniteBorelgraphonaPolishspaceX of
finitechromaticnumbern. LetKbethesimplicialcomplexasinExample11.4.7.
Let H be a finitary analytic hypergraph of uncountable Borel chromatic number.
Then
1. in the P -extension of the Solovay model, the chromatic number of H is
K
uncountable;
2. it is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds and
the chromatic number of G is ≤2n−1 and the chromatic number of H is
uncountable.
The following example is motivated by a question of Marks and Unger (private
communication): given a countable Borel equivalence relation E, is it consis-
tent with ZF+DC that E is a union of an increasing countable sequence of
equivalence relations with all equivalence classes finite and every set of reals
has the Baire property? While that question remains open, we do have partial
information:
Example 11.4.11. LetE beacountableBorelequivalencerelationonaPolish
space X with all classes infinite. Let K be the simplicial complex of all finite
directed subgraphs of E which are acyclic and every vertex has in-degree ≤ 1
and out-degree ≤ 1. Note that K is in fact a simplicial complex on E rather
than on X. The simplicial complex K is Suslin σ-centered by Theorem 11.4.6.
To see this, let Γ be a countable group acting on X in a Borel way such that E
is the resulting orbit equivalence relation. Let Γ={γ : k ∈ω} be an arbitrary
k
enumeration. Whenevera∈KisagraphwhosedomainisasubsetofasingleE-
class,letn(a)bethesmallestnumbersuchthatforanytwopointsx,y ∈dom(a)
there is k ∈ n(a) such that x = γ ·y, and let supp(a) = {{γ ·x,γ ·x}: x ∈
k l k
dom(a),k,l ∈n(a)}. If two graphs a ,a ∈K have disjoint support, they must
0 1
have disjoint domains. It follows that if a ∈ K are sets for i ∈ j which are
i
(cid:83)
subsetsofthesameE-classandhavepairwisedisjointsupports, then a ∈K
i i
as required in Theorem 11.4.6.