=== 块 32 ===

named in the proof to that point, and also
<κ
their powersets. Similarly, the phrase “a large fragment of ZFC” occurs in
several places in the book. It is never truly informative to analyze precisely

28 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
how large a fragment is needed. As a matter of convention, we mean the finite
fragmentofZFCincludingallaxiomsexcepttheschemasofcomprehensionand
replacement, and the schemas of comprehension of replacement for all formulas
of set theory of 10100 many symbols or fewer.
Analytic equivalence relations. A number of concepts and results in this
book are stated in terms of Borel equivalence relations on Polish spaces. As a
matter of basic terminology, if E is an equivalence relation on a set X, a E-
transversal is a set T ⊂X such that T has a singleton intersection which each
equivalence class. If x ∈ X is a point, then [x] denotes the equivalence class
E
containingx. IfA⊂X isanyset, then[A] denotestheE-saturation ofA, the
E
set{x∈X: ∃y ∈AxE y}. Thefollowingdefinitionrecordsseveralbenchmark
relations which are used throughout the book.
Definition 1.7.1.
1. E is the Vitali equivalence on 2ω, connecting x,y ∈ 2ω if they differ at
0
only finite set of entries;
2. E is the equivalence relation on (2ω)ω connecting x,y if they differ at
1
only finite number of entries;
3. E is the relation on 2ω connecting x,y if the sum Σ{ 1 : x(n) (cid:54)= y(n)}
2 n+1
is finite;
4. F is the equivalence relation on (2ω)ω connecting x,y if rng(x)=rng(y);
2
5. HC is the equivalence relation on P(ω ×ω) connecting relations x,y if
either both are illfounded or fail the axiom of extensionality or fail to
have a maximal element, or they are isomorphic;
6. E is the equivalence relation on P(ω ×ω) connecting relations x,y if
ω1
eitherbothareillfoundedorarenotlinearorders, ortheyareisomorphic;
7. if Γ is a coanalytic class of structures on ω invariant under isomorphism,
E istheequivalencerelationoncountablestructuresonωconnectingtwo
Γ
suchstructuresiftheyarebothfailtobelongtoΓortheyareisomorphic;
8. if I is an ideal on ω then = on 2ω is the equivalence relation connect-
I
ing x,y if {n ∈ ω: x(n) (cid:54)= y(n)} ∈ I. There is an identically defined
equivalence relation on (2ω)ω.
Borel equivalence relations are naturally ordered by Borel reducibility. In the
case of analytic equivalence relations, the Borel reducibility relation exhibits
certain pathologies, and it is best replaced by some of its strengthenings. This
is the content of the following definition.
Definition 1.7.2. Let E and F be analytic equivalence relations on respective
Polish spaces X and Y.
1. E is Borel reducible to F, in symbols E ≤ F, if there is a Borel function
h: X →Y such that ∀x ,x ∈X x E x iff h(x )F h(x ).
0 1 0 1 0 1