=== 块 264 ===

ey must
0 1
have disjoint domains. It follows that if a ∈ K are sets for i ∈ j which are
i
(cid:83)
subsetsofthesameE-classandhavepairwisedisjointsupports, then a ∈K
i i
as required in Theorem 11.4.6.

11.4. LOCALLY COUNTABLE SIMPLICIAL COMPLEXES 277
WeplantousethesimplicialcomplexKtointroduceanorderingofordertype
Z to each E-class. However, not every maximal K-set does that. Apparently, a
cofinalsubsetL⊂K isneededsothateveryL-largemaximalK-setcomesclose
the the purpose in mind. For one simple solution, let L ⊂ K be the collection
of all sets a∈K which in each E-class have only one vertex of in-degree 0 and
only one vertex of out-degree 0. Note that L⊂K is cofinal, and if c⊂X is an
E-class and d⊂c2 is an L-regular maximal K-set, then d is a ray of ordertype
Z or N or inverted N.
Corollary 11.4.12. Let E be a countable Borel equivalence relation with all
classes infinite as in Example 11.4.11. Let H be a finitary analytic hypergraph
of uncountable Borel chromatic number.
1. In the P -extension of the Solovay model, the chromatic number of H is
KL
uncountable;
2. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds and
E is the orbit equivalence relation of a (discontinuous) Z-action and the
chromatic number of H is uncountable.
Proof. The first item is the consequence of the fact that K is Suslin σ-centered
asprovedinExample11.4.11. Fortheseconditem,letW betheSolovaymodel
derivedfromsomeinaccessiblecardinalandletG⊂P beagenericfilterover
KL
(cid:83)
the model W. A genericity argument shows that G is an L-regular maximal
(cid:83)
K-set. For every E-class c, G on the class c indicates either an ordering of
type Z or of type N or of type inverted N. It is a matter of minor surgery in
ZF+DC to turn this into a relation which is an ordertype Z on every class.This
immediatelyprovidesanactionofZonX whichyieldsE asanorbitequivalence
relation. The chromatic number part of the second item follows from the first
item.
As a final observation, we show that the forcings of the type discussed in
Theorem11.4.5canbeplacedincountablesupportproduct,andtheconclusion
of Theorem 11.4.5 remains in place. Suppose that (cid:104)X : i ∈ ω(cid:105) are pairwise
i
disjointPolishspaces,and(cid:104)K ,L (cid:105)arelocallycountablepairsoneach. Suppose
i i
thateachsimplicialcomplexK isSuslinσ-centered. LetX bethePolishspace
i
which is the disjoint union of X for i ∈ n, let K be the simplicial complex of
i
those finite sets a ⊂ X such that a∩X ∈ K holds for every i ∈ ω, and let
i i
L = {a ∈ K: ∀i a∩X (cid:54)= 0 → a∩X ∈ L . Then P is a countable support
i i i KL
product of the posets P , and the simplicial complex K is Suslin σ-centered
KiLi
by Theorem 11.3.8, since it is the finite support product of the posets K for
i
(cid:81)
i ∈ ω. Therefore, by Theorem 11.4.5, in the P -extension of the Solovay
i KiLi
model, theuncountablechromaticnumbersoffinitaryanalytichypergraphsare
preserved.