=== 块 149 ===

e mutually generic extensions con-
0 1
tainingrespectiveconditionsp ,p belowτ ; wemustshowthatp ,p arecom-
0 1 f 0 1
patible. This is to say, p ∪p is a K -set; in other words, if x ∈ p and
0 1 E,F 0 0

156 CHAPTER 6. SIMPLICIAL COMPLEX FORCINGS
x ∈ p are F-related points then they are in fact E-related. To see this, by
1 1
a mutual genericity argument x ,x are realizations of some virtual F-class c;
0 1
by the definition of the virtual condition τ , they must be realizations of the
f
virtual E-class f(c) and therefore must be F-related.
For (2), first use a balance argument and Claim 6.6.13 to argue that for
each virtual F-class c there must be a unique virtual E-class d which is forced
to be a subclass of c and such that Q (cid:13) τ contains a realization of d. Let
f: X∗∗ →X∗∗ bethefunctionrecordingthecorrespondencec(cid:55)→dandobserve
F E
that Q × Coll(ω,(cid:105) ) (cid:13) τ ≤ τ holds. (2) then follows by a reference to
ω1 f
Proposition 5.2.4.
Finally, (3) is obvious. The balance of the poset P follows from the axiom
of choice: every condition p∈P can be extended to a virtual selection function
by virtua of Claim 6.6.13.
Example 6.6.14. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X which contains
no odd length cycles such that the G-path connectedness equivalence relation
F on X is Borel. We wish to add a 2-coloring of the graph Γ. To this end,
let E be the Borel equivalence relation on X relating x to y if x E y holds
and some (equivalently, every) Γ-path from x to y is of even length. It is clear
thateveryF-classconsistsofexactlytwoE-classes. TheE,F-transversalposet
selectsexactlyoneE-classfromeachF-classandthereforeaddsabipartization
of the graph Γ. The balanced conditions are classified by functions which select
exactly one virtual E-class from each virtual F-class.
Example6.6.15. LetF betheF -equivalencerelationonthespaceX =(2ω)ω.
2
LetE betheequivalencerelationonX connectingpointsx andx ifrng(x )=
0 1 0
rng(x ) and x (0) = x (0). Clearly, every F-class consists of only countably
1 0 1
many E-classes. An E,F-transversal can be viewed as a function which selects
a single element from each nonempty countable subset of 2ω. It is instructive
to inspect the balanced virtual conditions provided by Theorem 6.6.12. An
inspection reveals that a balanced virtual condition is a function which to each
nonempty subset of X assigns one of its elements, i.e. a selection function on
P(X). In consequence, the existence of balanced conditions for P is in ZF
equivalent to the statement that the space 2ω can be well-ordered.