=== 块 97 ===

0 1 0 1
B×B (cid:13)¬(τ ) E (τ ) , since E is absolute between generic extensions of
0 left 0 right
V and generic extensions of M by Borel absoluteness. In conclusion, E is not
virtually placid in V.

3.6. A VARIATION FOR MEASURE 97
Corollary 3.5.7. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space X.
The statement “E is placid” is absolute among transitive models of set theory
containing the code for E.
Proof. The placidity of E is a conjunction of virtual placidity and the pinned
propertyofEbyProposition3.3.4. TheconjunctsareabsolutebyTheorem3.5.6
and 2.7.1, and so is the conjunction.
3.6 A variation for measure
Thepurposeofthissectionistointroduceaparallelforturbulenceformeasure,
with attendant ergodicity results for measure. Curiously enough, the measure
theoretic parallel for turbulence is intimately connected to the concentration of
measure phenomenon. The following definition is close to the whirly actions of
[33]:
Definition 3.6.1. Let X be a Polish space with a Borel probability measure µ
and a metric d. Let Γ be a Polish group acting on X in a measure preserving
and distance preserving fashion. We say that the action has concentration of
measure if for every open neighborhood U ⊂ Γ containing the unit and every
ε > 0 there is δ > 0 such that for every d-ball B ⊂ X of radius < δ and every
Borel set C ⊂B of relative µ-mass >ε, the set (U ·C)∩B has relative µ-mass
>1/2.
Toformulatethemainresultsofthissection,letP betheCohenforcingon
Γ
Γ and P be the random forcing with µ, i.e. the forcing with µ-positive Borel
µ
subset of X, ordered by inclusion. The poset P adds a generic point γ˙ ∈Γ
Γ gen
while the poset P adds a random point x˙ ∈X.
µ gen
Theorem 3.6.2. Suppose that Γ is a Polish group acting on a Polish space X
with a Borel probability measure µ and an ultrametric d in a measure preserving
and distance preserving fashion. Suppose that the action has concentration of
measure. Then P ×P (cid:13)V[x˙ ]∩V[γ˙ ·x˙ ]=V.
Γ µ gen gen gen
The proof of Theorem 3.6.2 hinges on a new walk concept and a proposition.
Definition 3.6.3. Let U ⊂Γ be an open neighborhood of the unit and δ >0.
A U,δ-walk is a sequence (cid:104)x : i ≤ j(cid:105) of points in X such that for every i ∈ j,
i
either d(x ,x )<δ or there is γ ∈U such that γ·x =x .
i i+1 i i+1
Definition 3.6.4. Let U ⊂Γbeanopenneighborhoodoftheunitand D ⊂X
be a closed set. We say that the set D is U-connected if for any two points
x ,x ∈ D and any δ > 0 there is a U,δ-walk from x to x using only points
0 1 0 1
from D.
The main import of the concentration of measure assumption is that for any
open neighborhood U of the unit, closed U-connected µ-positive sets can be
found under every stone.