=== 块 66 ===

universality of the equivalence relation R to find an injection π: ω →X which
2
is a homomorphism of ¬T to ¬R. Observe that rng(π) is a G-anticlique of size
ℵ . By Proposition 2.5.27, κ(E )>ℵ .
2 G 2

2.6. RESTRICTIONS ON PARTIAL ORDERS 65
2.6 Restrictions on partial orders
GivenananalyticequivalencerelationEonaPolishspaceX,itmaybeinforma-
tive toinvestigatewhich posetscan carrynontrivial E-pinnednames. After all,
essentially all pinned names discussed in this chapter naturally live on collapse
posets, so one may easily (and wrongly) assume that no forcing sophistication
is needed when it comes to the investigation of the virtual realm. This section
contains several theorems on this topic.
First of all, there are some partial orders which can never carry a nontrivial
pinned name.
Definition 2.6.1. [29] A poset P is reasonable if for every ordinal λ and for
every function f: λ<ω → λ in the P-extension there is a set a ⊂ λ which is
closed under f, belongs to the ground model, and is countable in the ground
model.
Inparticular,allc.c.c. andallproperforcingsarereasonable. Goodexamplesof
unreasonable forcings are posets which collapse ℵ , Namba forcing and Prikry
1
forcing.
Theorem 2.6.2. Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space
X. If P is a reasonable forcing and τ is an E-pinned name on P, then τ is
trivial.
Proof. Suppose that P is a reasonable poset and τ is an E-pinned name on P.
We will produce a condition p ∈ P and a point x ∈ X such that p (cid:13) τ E xˇ.
Towardsthisend,choosealargestructureandusethereasonabilityofP tofind
acountableelementarysubmodelM ofitcontainingP,E andτ andacondition
p∈P suchthatp(cid:13)G˙ ∩Mˇ isgenericoverMˇ, whereG˙ isthecanonicalP-name
foritsgenericultrafilter. AsM iscountable,thereisafilterH ⊂P∩M generic
overM inthegroundmodelV. Letx=τ/H ∈X. Proposition2.1.5appliedto
themodelM andthefiltersH andG˙ ∩M nowsaysthatp(cid:13)xˇE τ, completing
the proof.
Thekeyfeatureofpartialordersfromthepointofviewofexistenceofpinned
names is collapsing ℵ , as the following theorem shows:
1
Theorem 2.6.3. Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space
X. Exactly one of the following occurs:
1. E is pinned;
2. for every poset P collapsing ℵ , P carries a nontrivial E-pinned name.
1
Proof. Clearly(1)impliesthenegationof(2). Forthedifficultdirection,suppose
that (1) fails and work to confirm (2). Let τ be a nontrivial E-pinned name
on some poset P. Let (cid:104)M : α ∈ ω (cid:105) be a continuous ∈-tower of countable
α 1
elementary submodels of a large structure containing X,E,τ, and P. Let M =
(cid:83)
M , let Q=P ∩M and let σ =τ ∩M.
α α