=== 块 274 ===

f of the minimum distance between
two of the three, we see that every point of the plane is at a distance >ε from
two of the three, and so there are only finitely many points Γ-connected to all
three.

11.6. COLLAPSES 287
Theorem 11.5.6 now yields
Corollary 11.5.12. Let (cid:126)r be a sequence of positive real numbers converging to
zero. Let Γ be the graph on X = R2 connecting two points if their Euclidean
distance is on the sequence (cid:126)r.
1. In the P -extension of the Solovay model, the graph H has uncountable
Γ ω
chromatic number. In particular, there is no E -transversal;
0
2. it is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, the
chromatic number of Γ is countable and the chromatic number of H is
ω
uncountable.
Example 11.5.13. Let D ⊂ R be a Borel set algebraically independent over
Q, consisting of positive reals. Let Γ be the graph on X = R2 connecting two
points if their Euclidean distance belongs to D. The graph Γ does not contain
an injective homomorphic copy of K for some large number n [59, Theorem
n,n
1]
Corollary 11.5.14. Let D ⊂ R be a Borel set algebraically independent over
Q, consisting of positive reals. Let Γ be the graph on X = R2 connecting two
points if their Euclidean distance belongs to D.
1. In the P -extension of the Solovay model, the diagonal Hamming graph
Γ
H has uncountable chromatic number;
<ω
2. it is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, the
chromatic number of Γ is countable and the chromatic number of H is
<ω
uncountable.
11.6 Collapses
Inthissection,weconsidertheproblemsofintroducinganinjectionfrom|F|to
2ω or to E , for a given pinned Borel equivalence relation F. It turns out that
0
the natural forcings preserve uncountable chromatic numbers of many graphs
and hypergraphs. In particular, they do not introduce a total E -transversal.
0
We start with the collapse to 2ω.
LetE beapinnedequivalencerelationonaPolishspaceX. Recallthedefi-
nitionoftheposetcollapsing|E|to|2ω|fromDefinition6.6.2: P bethepartial
E
order of pairs p = (cid:104)a ,b (cid:105) where a : X → 2ω is a countable partial function
p p p
such that for x ,x ∈ dom(a ), x E x iff a (x ) = a (x ), and b ⊂ 2ω is
0 1 p 0 1 p 0 p 1 p
a countable set disjoint from rng(a ). The ordering is that of coordinatewise
p
reverseinclusion. ItisimmediateinZF+DCthattheorderingP isSuslinand
E
σ-closed, and the union of the P -generic filter is an injection from the set of
E
E-classes to 2ω. The balanced conditions are classified by all such injections as
proved in Theorem 6.6.3.