=== 块 25 ===

es. Particularly interesting cases concern
the collapse of one quotient cardinality to another, Definition 6.6.2, and the
transversal type posets which to each pair E ⊂F of Borel equivalence relations

1.6. NAVIGATION 21
on a Polish space X add a maximal set A ⊂ X such that E (cid:22) A = F (cid:22) A–
Definition 6.6.5.
Chapter 7 analyzes various ways of adding a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω
to a choiceless model. The basic method, the poset of all infinite subsets of ω
ordered by inclusion, is investigated in Section 7.1. This poset adds a Ramsey
ultrafilter, and its balanced conditions are classified simply by ultrafilters. The
resulting model has been investigated from many directions previously [21, 90].
ThenextsimplesttypeofultrafilterisaddedbyaposetwithRamseysequences
of finite structures, discussed in Section 7.3. It turns out that balanced con-
ditions in this type of forcing are classified by ω-sequences of ultrafilters of a
certain type. Section 7.2 shows how to add an ultrafilter which is not a P-point
in the simplest fashion: using the quotient poset of P(ω×ω) modulo I where
I is the Fubini power of the Fr´echet ideal. The interesting development in this
case is the complexity of balanced conditions–they are classified by ultrafilters
on the set of ultrafilters on ω (Theorem 7.2.2). It is interesting to compare this
situationwithSection6.6: there,thebalancedconditionswerealsoclassifiedby
complexsets,butthecomplexityseemedtobeworkedintothedefinitionsofthe
posets from the beginning. Here, the increased complexity appeared without
invitation and as a surprise, at least to the authors. Section 7.4 shows how to
addastableorderedunionultrafilter; themostinterestinginsight–thebalanced
conditions are classified by idempotent ultrafilters (Theorem 7.4.7).
Chapter 8 contains the analysis of balanced forcings which are designed
to perform a specific task, and from the point of view of the previous chapters
may seem somewhat ad hoc. In Section 8.1, we consider the problem of adding
a coloring of a Borel graph by a fixed number of colors. It turns out that the
task is closely related to the coloring number of graphs introduced by Erd˝os
and Hajnal [25]. If a Borel graph has countable coloring number, then there
is a natural balanced poset (Definition 8.1.1) adding a coloring by countably
many colors (Theorem 8.1.2). The classical examples of such graphs appear
on Euclidean spaces as distance graphs (Example 8.1.7 and 8.1.8) and have
beenstudiedamongothersbytheHungariancombinatorialschool[58]. Adding
colorings to hypergraphs seems to be much trickier business. We show how to
addacountabledecompositionofavectorspaceoveracountablefieldsuchthat
no composant contains three linearly dependent points (Theorem 8.1.12), or a
countable decomposition in which each composant is fully linearly independent
(Theorem 8.1.19).
Section 8.2 considers the problem of adding a discontinuous homomorphism
between given Polish groups. This task cannot have a positive resolution in
general since many Polish groups have the automatic continuity property, for
example the unitary group [95]. However, we provide a balanced forcing in
the case of abelian groups, one of which is torsion free, and the other divisible
(Theorem8.2.2). Section8.3showsthatitispossibletoforceanontrivialauto-
morphism of the Boolean algebra P(ω) modulo finite with a balanced forcing.
The forcing consists simply of countable approximations ordered by reverse in-