=== 块 1 ===

Geometric set theory
Paul Larson
Jindˇrich Zapletal

vii

Preface
We wish to present to the reader a fresh and exciting new area of mathematics:
geometric set theory. The purpose of this research direction is to compare
transitive models of set theory with respect to their extensional agreement and
definability. It turns out that many fracture lines in descriptive set theory,
analysis,andmodeltheorycanbeefficientlyisolatedandtreatedfromthispoint
of view. A particular success is the comparison of various Σ2 consequences of
1
the Axiom of Choice in unparalleled detail and depth.
Thesubjectmatterofthebookwasratherslowincoming. Theinitialwork,
restating Hjorth’s turbulence in geometric terms and isolating the notion of a
virtual quotient space of an analytic equivalence relation, existed in rudimen-
taryversionssinceabout2013inunpublishedmanuscriptsofthesecondauthor.
Thejointeffort[63]containedsomeindependenceresultsinchoicelesssettheory
similar to those of the present book, but in decidedly suboptimal framework.
It was not until the January 2018 discovery of balanced Suslin forcing that the
flexibility and power of the geometric method fully asserted itself. The period
after that discovery was filled with intense wonder–passing from one configura-
tion of models of set theory to another and testing how they separate various
well-known concepts in descriptive set theory, analysis, and model theory. At
the time of writing, geometric set theory seems to be an area wide open for
innumerable applications.
Theauthorsbenefitedfromdiscussionwithanumberofmathematicians,in-
cluding,butnotlimitedto,DavidChodounsky´,JamesFreitag,MichaelHruˇs´ak,
Anush Tserunyan, Douglas Ulrich, and Lou van den Dries. The second author
wishes to extend particular thanks to Bernoulli Center at EPFL Lausanne,
where a significant part of the results was obtained during the special semester
on descriptive set theory and Polish groups in 2018.
Duringtheworkonthebook, thefirstauthorwassupportedbygrantsNSF
DMS 1201494 and DMS-1764320. The second author was supported by NSF
grant DMS 1161078.
v

vi PREFACE