=== 块 12 ===

yperedges finite, on
a Polish space X, with uncountable Borel chromatic number. The following are
consistent with ZF+DC plus the statement that the chromatic number of the
hypergraph G is uncountable:

8 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1. (Corollary 11.4.12) given a countable Borel equivalence relation E on a
Polish space with all classes infinite, E is the orbit equivalence relation of
a (discontinuous) action of Z;
2. (Corollary 11.4.10) given a locally finite acyclic Borel graph Γ on a Polish
space, the chromatic number of Γ is ≤3;
3. (Corollary11.6.7) given a pinned Borel equivalence relation E on a Polish
space, |E|≤|E |.
0
AnimportantfracturelineamongBorellocallycountablegraphsappearsatthe
level of the diagonal Hamming graph H which is the product of cliques on
<ω
2,3,4...:
Theorem 1.3.7. The following are consistent with ZF+DC plus the statement
that the chromatic number of H is uncountable:
<ω
1. (Corollary 11.7.8) there is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω;
2. (Corollary 11.7.10) given a locally finite bipartite Borel graph Γ satisfying
the Hall’s marriage condition, Γ has a perfect matching;
3. (Corollary 11.7.9) given a Borel equivalence relation E on a Polish space
X, the E-quotient space is linearly ordered;
4. (Corollary11.6.3) given a pinned Borel equivalence relation E on a Polish
space, |E|≤|2ω|.
Note that in the case of the last consistency result for the case E = E , the
0
countable uniformization has to fail, as the uncountable chromatic number of
H implies among other things that E has no transversal.
<ω 0
AnotherfracturelineoccursattheleveloftheHamminggraphH onωω which
ω
is the product of infinitely many cliques on ω:
Theorem1.3.8. (Corollary11.5.10)ItisconsistentwithZF+DCthatthechro-
matic number of the diagonal Hamming graph H is countable while the chro-
<ω
matic number of the Hamming graph H on the Baire space is uncountable.
ω
Model theory. Given a pre-geometry on a Polish structure (for example, the
pre-geometryoflinearspanonaPolishvectorspace),theaxiomofchoiceyields
a maximal independent set (a basis for the vector space). This broad stroke
erasesmanyfinecombinatorialdistinctionsbetweenthevariouspre-geometries.
In the choiceless context, interesting distinctions become visible.
In our context, it is more convenient to work with Borel matroids, a combi-
natorial concept dual to pre-geometries. Matroids from a broad class give rise
to balanced forcings (Theorem 6.5.2), providing theorems of the following kind:
Theorem 1.3.9. (Corollary 12.2.13) It is consistent with ZF+DC that there
is a transcendence basis for the reals over Q and there is no diffuse probability
measure on ω.