=== 块 114 ===

f them in the intersection model. Yet, there is a virtual F -class related to
2
these enumerations in the intersection model, and even in the ground model V.

116 CHAPTER 4. NESTED SEQUENCES OF MODELS

Part II
Balanced extensions of the
Solovay model
117

Chapter 5
Balanced Suslin forcing
5.1 Virtual conditions
We look at the class of Suslin posets from an angle quite distinct from the
standard treatment in [7]; in particular, the center of attention is on σ-closed
Suslin forcings as opposed to c.c.c. or proper forcings adding reals. Recall:
Definition 5.1.1. A preorder (cid:104)P,≤(cid:105) is Suslin if there is a Polish space X such
that
1. P is an analytic subset of X;
2. the ordering ≤ is an analytic subset of X2;
3. the incompatibility relation is an analytic subset of X2.
It is important to understand that Suslin forcings may fail to be separative.
Recall that conditions p ,p are called inseparable if for every condition q ≤p ,
0 1 0
q,p have a lower bound, and vice versa, for every condition q ≤p , q,p have
1 1 0
a lower bound. The inseparability relation E is an equivalence; the partial
P
order P is separative if this equivalence relation is the identity. A simple yet
informative example of a nonseparative Suslin forcing is in order. Consider the
poset of countable partial functions from 2ω to 2 ordered by reverse extension.
As stated, it is not a Suslin forcing, since it is not an analytic subset of a
Polish space. One has to make an innocuous adjustment: P is in fact the set
of all functions from ω to 2ω ×2 whose range is a function, and order P by
setting q ≤p if rng(p)⊆rng(q). This adjustment sacrifices the separability for
Suslinness. Note that the equivalence relation E is unpinned in this case.
P
Throughout the rest of the book, we will make use of virtual conditions
in Suslin posets. Similar to virtual equivalence classes, these are conditions
whichmaynotexistinthepresentmodelofsettheoryandappearonlyinsome
generic extension, and yet we have a sensible calculus for dealing with them in
the ground model. We want the space of virtual conditions not to depend on a
119