=== 块 228 ===

⊂ R and H ⊂ R are
0 1 0 0 1 1
mutually generic filters and p ∈V[H ], p ∈V[H ] are conditions below p¯ ,p¯
0 0 1 1 0 1
respectively. In view of the definition of the equivalence of balanced pairs,
239

240 CHAPTER 10. UNIFORMIZATION
it will be enough to show that p ,p are compatible. However, if they were
0 1
incompatible, by the tether assumption there would have to be incompatible
virtual conditions p(cid:48),p(cid:48) ∈ A such that p(cid:48),p are compatible and p(cid:48),p are
0 1 0 0 1 1
compatible. By the note from the previous paragraph, it must be the case that
p(cid:48),p(cid:48) ∈B holds. But then, p(cid:48),p(cid:48) are not incompatible because p¯ ,p¯ are both
0 1 0 1 0 1
their common lower bounds.
10.2 Pinned uniformization
In this section, we show that sets whose vertical sections are E-classes for a
suitably regular equivalence relation E can be uniformized.
Definition 10.2.1. Let E be an equivalence relation on a Polish space X. E-
uniformization is the statement: if B ⊂2ω×X is a set whose vertical sections
are E-classes, then there is a function f ⊂ B such that for every y ∈ 2ω, if
B (cid:54)=0 then f(y) is defined (and is an element of B ).
y y
The central theorem of this section can now be stated using Convention 1.7.16.
Theorem 10.2.2. Let E be a pinned Borel equivalence relation on a Polish
space X. In tethered, cofinally balanced extensions of the symmetric Solovay
model, E-uniformization holds.
Toparsethestatementofthetheoremcorrectly,notethatP needstobetethered
in all forcing extensions and balanced only in cofinally many forcing extensions
belowtheinaccessiblecardinalwhichgivesrisetothesymmetricSolovaymodel.
Proof. Let κ be an inaccessible cardinal. Let P be a Suslin poset which is
balancedcofinallybelowκandtetheredbelowκ. LetW beasymmetricSolovay
modelderivedfrom κ. LetG⊂P beafiltergeneric over W andwork inW[G].
The following claim contains the key use of the tether assumption.
Claim 10.2.3. Let y ∈ W[G] be any set and let M be the class of all sets
hereditarily definable from G,y, and parameters in the ground model. Then G
contains a realization of a balanced virtual condition in M.
A tacit part of the statement of the claim is that M is a model of ZFC, and
therefore it belongs to W by Theorem 9.1.1 by the cofinal balance assumption
on the poset P; in fact, it is a generic extension of the ground model by a poset
of size <κ.
Proof. Use the tether assumption to find a cardinal λ ∈ κ such that M |= P
is λ-tethered. Working in M, let D be the set of all virtual conditions in P
represented on posets of size <λ. In W[G], let C ⊂D be the set of all virtual
conditions in the set D whose realization belongs to the generic filter G. The
set C has just been defined from the ordinal λ and the ultrafilter G, so C ∈M.
BythegenericityofthefilterG,theremustbeaconditionp∈Gwhichisbelow
all conditions in C and incompatible with all the conditions in D\C. By the