=== 块 206 ===

do not share any F-class
0 1
whichisnotrepresentedinthegroundmodel. Inthecaseofaplacidequivalence
relation E, this is implied by the assumption that V[H ]∩V[H ] = V by the
0 1
definition of placidity.

9.3. THE TURBULENT DIVIDE 215
Corollary 9.3.10. Suppose that E is a Borel placid equivalence relation on a
Polish space X..
1. In the extension of the symmetric Solovay model by the transversal poset
for E of Example 6.6.8, the turbulent divide is preserved;
2. it is consistent relatively to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, E
has a transversal, and yet the turbulent divide is preserved.
TheposetswhichselectastructureoneachE-classforacountableBorelequiv-
alence relation E are placid by Example 9.3.9, resulting of many corollaries of
the following kind.
Corollary 9.3.11. Suppose that E is a countable Borel equivalence relation on
a Polish space X with infinite classes.
1. In the extension of the symmetric Solovay model by the Z-action poset of
Example 6.6.10, the turbulent divide is preserved;
2. it is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, E is
anorbitequivalenceofa(discontinuous)actionofZ, andyettheturbulent
divide is preserved.
Example 9.3.12. Suppose that F is a Fraiss´e class of structures in finite rela-
tional language, with strong amalgamation. Let E be a virtually placid equiva-
lencerelationonaPolishspaceX. LetP betheposetforaddinganF-structure
on the quotient space X with countable approximations of Definition 8.6.3.
Then P is placid, and every balanced condition is placid.
Corollary 9.3.13. Let E be a Borel virtually placid equivalence relation on a
Polish space X.
1. In the extension of the symmetric Solovay model by the linearization poset
for E of Example 8.6.5, the turbulent divide is preserved;
2. it is consistent relatively to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds,
the E-quotient space is linearly ordered and yet the turbulent divide is
preserved.
Example 9.3.14. SupposethatX isaPolishspaceandP istheKurepaposet
on it as isolated in Definition 8.4.2. Then P is placid, and every balanced
condition is placid. To see this observe that the proof of Theorem 8.4.3 used
only the consequence V[H ]∩V[H ]=V for mutually generic filters H ,H .
0 1 0 1
Corollary 9.3.15. Let X be a Polish space.
1. In the extension of the symmetric Solovay model by the Kurepa poset, the
turbulent divide is preserved;