=== 块 28 ===

dconditionsforP. AnumberofexamplesappearinSec-
tion10.5. Sections10.2, 10.3,and 10.4studyvariousuniformizationprinciples
in turn and show that they in fact hold in tethered extensions of the symmetric

24 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Solovay model. Lastly, Section 10.5 provides a great number of examples and
non-examples.
Chapter 11 considers the independence results which appear when one
attempts to select one type of structure to each E-class, and not select another
type; here E is a given countable Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space.
The problems considered are motivated by the present practice of descriptive
graphtheory. Theupshotisadiscoveryofnewandverypertinentfracturelines
in the area. The main point of the whole section is that the definable c.c.c.
posets have great influence on independence results in ZF+DC, even though
heretofore they were used only for ZFC independence results.
The fracture lines and their critical objects are defined in Section 11.1. We
define two variations of countable Borel chromatic number of hypergraphs on
Polish spaces: the Borel σ-finite chromatic number (Definition 11.1.9) and the
Borel σ-finite fractional chromatic number (Definition 11.1.18. The relevant
classes of hypergraphs contain minimal objects obtained by the same operation
ofaskewproduct(Definition11.1.1). Thereareseveraldichotomiesinstylevery
similar to the original G -dichotomy of [54]. A number of examples illustrate
0
the new concepts; among them, there is one obtained from the density version
of the van der Waerden theorem (Example 11.1.20).
Section11.2containsinformationonthebasictechnicaltoolneededtoprove
independence results on locally finite structures: very Suslin c.c.c. forcing no-
tions (Definition 11.2.3) and their iterations. The section is written in such a
waythatspecialistsonZFCindependenceresultscanuseitsresultsfortheirown
purposes. ThebasicresultshowsthatthefinitesupportiterationsofverySuslin
forcingnotionsareverySuslinagain(Theorem11.2.7). Along-standingconcern
ofStevoTodorcevicalsomakesappearance: foragivenBorelsimplicialcomplex
K, viewed as a poset with the reverse inclusion ordering, determining whether
the poset is c.c.c. and calibrating its chain condition carefully. The section
provides a novel angle though: the regularity properties of the posets must be
exemplified in a simply definable way. Thus, Section ?? discusses posets which
can be covered by countably many analytic linked pieces and their iterations,
and proves an iteration and product preservation theorem. Sections ??, ??,
and ?? provide the same treatment for posets which are definably σ-centered,
haveadefinableversionofafinitelyadditivemeasure,andareσ-liminf-centered,
respectively.
Section 11.4 finally produces some independence results in ZF+DC. The
common theme: there is a Borel locally countable simplicial complex K on a
Polishspace,andwestudytheconsequencesoftheexistenceofamaximalK-set
of a certain type. Adding colorings for various locally countable hypergraphs,
for example, can be viewed from this angle. In all cases, the definable forcing
properties of K as a poset ordered by reverse inclusion play central role. We
prove several results resonating with the current descriptive graph theory. Let
G be an analytic hypergraph with finite hyperedges, with uncountable Borel
chromatic number. Given a countable Borel equivalence relation E, we prove
the consistency of ZF+DC plus “E is an orbit equivalence of a Z-action” plus