=== 块 305 ===

e an uncountable Polish field and let Ψ be a countable subfield.
1. Let P be the basis poset of Example 6.4.9. In the P-extension of the
symmetric Solovay model, Y does not have a transcendence basis.

320 CHAPTER 12. THE SILVER DIVIDE
2. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, X
has a Hamel basis over Φ, and Y does not have a transcendence basis over
Ψ.
Corollary 12.3.9. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space
induced by a generically turbulent Polish group action. Let F be a Borel equiv-
alence relation on a Polish space, classifiable by countable structures.
1. Let P be the linearization poset for F as in Example 8.6.5. In the P-
extension of the Solovay model, there is no tournament on the E-quotient
space;
2. it is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, the
F-quotient space is linearly ordered, and yet there is no tournament on
the E-quotient space.
12.4 Existence of generic filters
Let P be a Suslin forcing. In the presence of suitable large cardinal axioms,
one can replace the P-extension of the symmetric Solovay model with the P-
extension of the model L(R). A standard absoluteness argument shows that
validity of Π2 sentences transfers from the former to the latter, and so the
1
latter can serve as a vehicle for most independence results presented in this
book. Anaturalquestionarises: doesthereexistafilterG⊂P whichisgeneric
over L(R)?
The answer is an easy yes if the poset P in question is σ-closed and the
Continuum Hypothesis holds, since then one can meet the dense subsets of the
poset P appearing in the model L(R) one by one in a straightforward trans-
finite recursion argument. An interesting feature of Bernstein balance is that
it guarantees the existence of generic filters over inner models such as L(R)
independently of cardinal arithmetic and assumptions such as the Continuum
Hypothesis, purely as a consequence of large cardinal axioms.
Definition 12.4.1. Let P be a Suslin forcing.
1. If B ⊂P is a set and p∈P then write p≤B to denote that p is stronger
than all conditions in B;
2. if B ⊂P then τ is the Coll(ω,B)-name for the analytic set {p∈P: p≤
B
B}.
3. We say that P is soft if for every centered set B ⊂ P of cardinality less
than c there is a centered set C ⊃B such that the pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,C),τ (cid:105) is
C
a Bernstein balanced virtual condition.
Note that a soft poset P must have the following centeredness property: if
B ⊂ P is a countable centered set, then B has a lower bound. To see this,