=== 块 18 ===

le 12.4.6.
Onecanaddotherstructurestoquotientspaces. Inparticular,onecanadda
tournamentinsteadofalinearordering. Intheresultingmodel,theE -quotient
0
space cannot be linearly ordered–Corollary 13.3.2.

14 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The transversal models. Let E be a pinned Borel equivalence relation on
a Polish space X. Consider the poset P of countable subsets of X consisting
of pairwise E-unrelated elements, ordered by reverse inclusion. The generic
filter yields an E-transversal T ⊂X. The study of the resulting model is fairly
straightforward with our methods:
Theorem 1.4.4. In the model W[T], the following statements hold:
1. (Theorem 12.2.5) the Open Coloring Axiom;
2. (Corollary ??) there is no nonatomic probability measure on ω;
3. (Corollary ??) there is no transcendence basis for R;
4. (Corollary13.3.10) there is no discontinuous homomorphism between Pol-
ish groups;
5. (Example 10.5.7) countable-to-one uniformization.
OtherfeaturesdependontheequivalencerelationE inaratherpredictableway.
Thus, if E is classifiable by countable structures, then in W[T], |F|(cid:54)≤|G| holds
wheneverF isanorbitequivalencerelationofaturbulentgroupactionandGis
an equivalence relation classifiable by countable structures. If E is reducible to
an orbit equivalence relation, then in W[T], |E |(cid:54)≤|G| holds whenever G is an
1
orbitequivalencerelationofaturbulentgroupaction. Ifsuitablelargecardinals
exist, one can find a transversal generic over the model L(R), independently of
the size or structure of the continuum. The model L(R)[T] inherits all features
quoted in Theorem 1.4.4.
1.5 Independence: by preservation theorem
Forapractitioner, itisprobablymostusefultocategorizetheresultsweobtain
by the technical preservation theorem for balanced forcing that leads to them.
The spectrum of preservation theorems for balanced forcing rivals the proper
forcing technology. All of the classes considered below (with the exception of
nested balanced and weakly balanced forcings) are closed under countable, full
support product.
In the broad class of balanced forcings, a number of preservation theorems
are possible. The balanced extensions of symmetric Solovay model do not add
any well-ordered sequences of elements of the Solovay model–Theorem 9.1.1.
They do not contain any inequalities of the form |E+|≤|E| where E is a Borel
equivalencerelationandE+ isitsFriedman–Stanleyjump–Corollary9.1.5. Cer-
tainmoresophisticatedobjectsaremissingfromtheseextensions,suchasmax-
imal almost disjoint families–Theorem 14.1.1. To overcome these limitations,
one has to reach for the weakly balanced forcings. They do not add any sets of
ordinals. A prominent example of a weakly balanced forcing which is not bal-
anced is one which adds a maximal almost disjoint family with a certain type
of approximations.