=== 块 311 ===

finition 13.1.2. Let n ∈ m be numbers. A poset P is m,n-centered if
whenever a ⊂ P is a set of size m such that any subset of a of size n has a
common lower bound, then a has a common lower bound.
327

328 CHAPTER 13. THE ARITY DIVIDE
Asaninitialexample,letP bethepartialorderofalltournamentsoncount-
ablesetsofE -classes,orderedbyreverseinclusion. Init,everycountablesetof
0
pairwise compatible conditions has a common lower bound. It is immediately
clear that every balanced poset which is m,n-centered is also m,n-balanced
and each balanced virtual condition in it is m,n-balanced. An important part
of this chapter is devoted to detecting distinctions between m,n-balanced and
m,n-centered forcings. Here, we restrict ourselves to two initial observations.
Note that m,n-centeredness (unlike the corresponding balance notion) is Π1
2
and therefore absolute between all generic extensions. Note also that m,n-
centeredness is a combinatorial (as opposed to forcing) property of the the
poset, in the sense that one can have two analytic dense subsets Q ,Q of a
0 1
given Suslin poset P such that Q is m,n-centered while Q is not. On the
0 1
other hand, m,n-balance is decidedly a forcing property of posets.
As a final remark, observe that both m,n-balance and m,n-centeredness
are properties preserved by countable support product. Thus, the numerous
independence results in this chapter can be combined.
13.2 Preservation theorems
The main reason for considering the m,n-balance is that it rules out discon-
tinuous homomorphisms between Polish groups in balanced extensions of the
symmetric Solovay model. One way of doing that is to prove that in the given
model of ZF+DC, the chromatic number of the Hamming graph H is not two
2
(sayusingTheorem11.4.13or14.4.7),andthenusearesultof[76]toshowthat
in ZF+DC this rules out discontinuous homomorphisms. The following theo-
rem works in many cases which are not treatable using the chromatic number
of the Hamming graph. Note that a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω yields in ZF
a discontinuous homomorphism from 2ω to 2; thus, ruling out discontinuous
homomorphisms automatically rules out nonprincipal ultrafilters on ω as well.
The following theorems are stated using Convention 1.7.16.
Theorem 13.2.1. Let n ∈ ω be a number. In cofinally n+1,n-balanced ex-
tensions of the symmetric Solovay model, all homomorphisms between Polish
groups are continuous.
Proof. Suppose that κ is an inaccessible cardinal. Suppose that P is a Suslin
forcing which is is n+1,n-balanced cofinally below κ. Let W be a symmetric
SolovaymodelderivedfromκandworkinW. Supposetowardsacontradiction
that the conclusion of the theorem fails: thus, there are Polish groups Γ,∆, a
condition p ∈ P and a P-name τ such that p (cid:13) τ: Γ → ∆ is a discontinuous
homomorphism. Both p and τ must be definable in W from parameters in
the ground model and some point z ∈ 2ω. Let V[K] be some intermediate
extension of V by a poset of cardinality smaller than κ such that z ∈V[K] and
P is n+1,n-balanced in V[K]. Work in the model V[K].
Let p¯≤p be a n+1,n-balanced condition. Consider the poset P adding a
Γ
generic element γ˙ of the group Γ. The following is a key claim:
gen