=== 块 279 ===

finitaryhypergraphonaPolishspace, withuncountableBorelchromatic
number. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds,
|E|≤|E | and the chromatic number of G is uncountable.
0

292 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
11.7 Compactly balanced posets
In this section we prove an additional preservation property of compactly bal-
ancedposetsofDefinition9.2.1whichconcernsthelocallycountablestructures.
Definition 11.7.1. LetGbeananalyticfinitaryhypergraphonaPolishspace
X. The hypergraph is actionable if there is a countable group Γ acting on a
Polish space X such that all hyperedges of G consist of pairwise orbit-related
elements and for every γ ∈Γ, γ·G=G.
The following theorem is stated using Convention 1.7.16.
Theorem 11.7.2. Let G be an analytic, finitary, actionable hypergraph on a
Polish space X which does not have Borel σ-bounded chromatic number. Then
in compactly balanced extensions of the Solovay model, G has uncountable chro-
matic number.
The actionable assumption is necessary, see the example below. The main
difference between the general and actionable hypergraphs we exploit is the
following routine strengthening of Fact 11.1.13; instead of skew products we
can deal with the usual product.
Fact 11.7.3. Let G be a finitary analytic actionable hypergraph on a Polish
space X. Exactly one of the following occurs:
1. G has Borel σ-bounded chromatic number;
2. there is a large product H on a Polish space Y and a continuous homo-
morphism h: Y →X of H to G.
Proof. InviewofFact11.7.3,itisenoughtoprovethetheoremforlargeproduct
hypergraphs. Thus,let(cid:104)a ,H : n∈ω(cid:105)beasequencesuchthatforeveryn∈ω,
n n
H isahypergraphonthefiniteseta ,and|a |≥2andthechromaticnumber
n n n
(cid:81)
ofH isatleastn,andassumethatGisinfacttheproducthypergraph H
n n n
(cid:81)
on the space Y = a . With a large product of this form, we associate the
n n
posetRofallfunctionsr withdomainω suchthatforeveryn∈ω,r(n)⊂a is
n
a nonempty set and the chromatic numbers of H on r(n) are unbounded as n
n
tendstoinfinity. TheorderingonRisthatofcoordinatewiseinclusion. Clearly,
the poset R adds a point y˙ ∈Y defined by y˙ (n) is the only element of the
gen gen
(cid:84)
set {r(n): r belongs to the generic filter}. The following claim is key.
Claim11.7.4. TheposetRisproper, bounding, andaddsnoindependentreals.
Proof. The first two assertions of the following claim are standard and proved
by the usual fusion arguments. The last assertion is the heart of the present
proof. Suppose that r ∈ R is a condition and τ is an R-name for a subset
of ω; we have to find a condition s ≤ r and an infinite set c ⊂ ω such that
s (cid:13) cˇ⊂ τ or cˇ∩τ = 0. Strengthening the condition r if necessary, a standard
(cid:81)
fusion argument will yield a continuous function f: r(n)→P(ω) such that
n
r (cid:13)τ =f˙(y˙ ).
gen