=== 块 284 ===

eseta ⊂X isasubsetofasingleE -classandvisitsnmany
xm 0
distinctE -classes, eachinnmanyelements. Asimplecountingargumentthen
1
shows that every subset of a of size m+1 contains a G-hyperedge, and so
xm

11.7. COMPACTLY BALANCED POSETS 297
the fractional chromatic number of G on the set a is not smaller than m as
xm
witnessed by the normalized counting measure on a .
xm
(cid:83)
Now, suppose that X = B is a partition into Borel sets. By the Baire
n n
category theorem, there is a number n ∈ ω such that B is not meager. In
n
view of the first paragraph, to prove the claim it will be enough that for all but
finitelymanym∈ωthereisapointx∈X suchthata ⊂B . Tothisend,let
xm n
t: Γ→2 be a finite partial function such that B is comeager in [t]. Let m∈ω
n
be larger than the length of any word in t; we will find a point x∈X such that
(cid:83)
a ⊂ B . Just let s = {t : i,j ∈ m} where t : Γ → 2 is a finite partial
xm n ij ij
functiongivenbythedemandt (β)=t(δimγjmβ). Bythechoiceofthenumber
ij
m, s: Γ → 2 is a finite function. The set C = (cid:84) {γ−jmδ−imB : i,j ∈ m} is
n
comeager in [s]; let x ∈ C be an arbitrary point. Reviewing the definitions, it
is clear that a ⊂B as required.
xm
Now, considertheposetP addinganorientationofH inwhicheveryvertex
in X gets an out-degree one. A condition p∈P is an orientation on countably
many components of H in which every vertex in these components gets an out-
degreeone. Theorderingisthatofreverseinclusion. TheposetP wasanalyzed
in Example 9.2.15 It is not difficult to prove that the balanced conditions of
P are classified by orientations of H in which every vertex gets an out-degree
one, which naturally form a compact Hausdorff space. Thus, the poset P is
compactly balanced, and it adds an H-coloring with countably many colors by
Claim11.7.12whilethehypergraphH doesnothaveBorelσ-boundedchomatic
or even fractional chromatic number by Claim 11.7.12.

298 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES

Chapter 12
The Silver divide
12.1 Perfectly balanced forcing
TheperfectsetpropertyinthemodelL(R)[U],whereU isaRamseyultrafilter,
was one of the first results in the literature about models of the type studied
in this book [21]. In this section, we provide a general machinery for proving
the perfect set property type of results, with much less effort than the original
argument quoted above. We start with two key definitions.
Definition 12.1.1. Let P be a Suslin poset. A virtual condition p¯is perfectly
balanced if in every generic extension V[G], whenever
1. Q∈V is a poset such that P(Q)∩V is countable in V[G];
2. σ ∈V is a Q-name for a condition in P stronger than p¯;
3. H⊂PQ is a perfect set such that every finite set a⊂H is a set of filters
over Q mutually generic over V,
thenthereisaperfectsetC ⊂Hsuchthatthesetofconditions{σ/H: H ∈C}
has a lower bound in the separative quotient. A poset is perfectly balanced if
below every condition p∈P there is a virtual perfectly balanced condition.
This forcing property is often guaranteed by a simple feature which does not
speak about any balance issues at all.
Definition 12.1.2. A Suslin forcing P is perfect if for every Borel function
f: 2ω → P, either there is a finite set a ⊂ 2ω such that the set f(cid:48)(cid:48)a ⊂ P has
no lower bound, or else there is a perfect set C ⊂2ω such that f(cid:48)(cid:48)C has a lower
bound in the separative quotient.
In general, the separative quotient of Suslin forcings is a Π1 ordering, making
2
perfectness a rather complicated projective property of the poset P. In all
particular posets considered in this book, the status of perfectness is absolute
throughout all forcing extensions.
299