=== 块 7 ===

on the class of E-pins, which naturally extends
theanalyticequivalencerelationE intothetransfinitedomain–Definitions2.1.1
and 2.1.4. The virtual E-quotient space is then the class of all E-pins up to

1.2. EQUIVALENCE RELATION RESULTS 3
their equivalence. Every Borel structure on the E-quotient space has a natural
virtual version on the virtual E-quotient space. Virtual structures appear in
many places in this book. The main theorem governing their behavior:
Theorem 1.2.1. (Proposition 2.2.5) Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on
a Polish space X. Let M be a Borel structure on the E-quotient space X/E.
The natural map from the E-quotient space to the virtual E-quotient space is a
Π -elementary embedding from M to its virtual version.
1
To size up the virtual E-quotient space, in Definition 2.5.1 we isolate cardinal
invariantsκ(E)andλ(E)ofanequivalencerelationE: λ(E)isthecardinalityof
the virtual space, while κ(E) is its forcing-theoretic complexity. The cardinals
κ(E),λ(E) respect the Borel reducibility order of equivalence relations, and
as such serve as valuable tools for non-reducibility results. Their key feature:
for Borel equivalence relations E, these cardinals are well-defined and obey an
explicit upper bound. In particular, the virtual E-quotient space is a set, as
opposed to a proper class as occurs for some analytic equivalence relations.
Theorem 1.2.2. (Theorem 2.5.6) Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a
Polish space X. Then κ(E),λ(E)<(cid:105) .
ω1
As a result, the well-known Friedman–Stanley theorem [31] on nonreducibility
ofajumpE+ ofaBorelequivalencerelationE toE isimmediatelytranslatedto
theCantortheoremonthecardinalityofthepowerset: λ(E+)=2λ(E) >λ(E)–
Example 2.5.5. Other similar conceptual and brief nonreducibility results ap-
pear as well. The cardinal invariants κ(E) and λ(E) can attain many exotic
and informative values, and inequalities between them can be manipulated by
forcing. MostofSection2.5isdevotedtoexamplesofsuchmanipulation. How-
ever, the main underlying concept is absolute, which justifies the parlance used
throughout the book:
Theorem 1.2.3. (Corollary 2.7.3) Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a
Polish space X. The statement “E is pinned” is absolute among all generic
extensions.
WestressthattheaboveresultholdswithinthecontextofZFC.Ifonedropsthe
AxiomofChoicebutholdsontoDependentChoices,theclassofBorelunpinned
equivalence relations will shrink; in the symmetric Solovay model, it shrinks to
the minimal possible extent: only the canonical unpinned relation F and the
2
equivalence relations above it in the reducibility order are unpinned, see below.
If one drops even the Axiom of Dependent Choices, the class of Borel unpinned
equivalence relations becomes more erratic. We conjecture that it may expand
to its largest possible extent: to the class of equivalence relations which are not
reducible to F equivalence relations.
σ
As is usual in the realm of equivalence relations, we aim to prove various
dichotomies.
Theorem 1.2.4. (Theorem2.8.9) Suppose that there is a measurable cardinal.
Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space X. Exactly one of
the following occurs: