=== 块 20 ===

.1. Prominent examples include posets
x
adding ultrafilters, like the poset of infinite subsets of ω ordered by inclusion.
The perfectly balanced extensions of the symmetric Solovay model satisfy such

16 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
features as the strong Silver dichotomy (Theorem 12.1.6) and a strong version
of OCA (Theorem 12.1.8).
TheBernsteinbalancedforcingsarethoseposetsforwhich,whenever{V[H ]: x∈
x
2ω}isaperfectcollectionofmutuallygenericextensionsofV andineachmodel
V[H ] there is a condition p ∈ P stronger than a given balanced condition p¯,
x x
no condition in P below p¯ is incompatible with more than countably many
conditions p for x ∈ 2ω–Definition 12.2.1. While this definition may look ob-
x
scure at first reading, many posets satisfy it and it has many consequences
which are difficult to obtain otherwise. Bernstein balanced forcings add no
finitely additive diffuse probability measures on ω, in particular non nonprinci-
pal ultrafilters–Theorem 12.2.3. Among other effects, their generic extensions
satisfy the Open Coloring Axiom–Theorem 12.2.5. For many of them, a fil-
ter generic over the model L(R) exists in the theory ZFC plus a suitable large
cardinal, independently of the status of the Continuum Hypothesis or similar
issues–Theorem 12.4.2. The Bernstein balanced forcings should be viewed as
dual to the perfectly balanced forcings, as generic filter for a perfectly balanced
forcing and a generic filter for a Bernstein balanced forcing tend to be auto-
matically mutually generic–Theorem 12.4.12. Prominent examples of Bernstein
balanced forcings include all placid forcings and also the forcings adding tran-
scendence bases to Polish fields.
3,2-balanced forcings form a class useful for ruling out discontinuous ho-
momorphisms between Polish groups. A poset P is 3,2-balanced if there are
3,2-balancedvirtualconditionsp¯init;thesearevirtualconditionssuchthatfor
anytripleV[H ],V[H ],V[H ]ofpairwisemutuallygenericextensionsofV and
0 1 2
conditions p ∈V[H ],p ∈V[H ], and p ∈V[H ] below p¯there is a common
0 0 1 1 2 2
lower bound of {p ,p ,p }–Definition 13.1.1. A prominent example is the forc-
0 1 2
ing adding a linear ordering of a given quotient space by countable approxima-
tions. 3,2-balanced extensions of the symmetric Solovay model do not contain
any discontinuous homomorphisms between Polish groups; in particular, they
contain no nonprincipal ultrafilters on ω–Theorem 13.2.1. Among other effects,
they do not contain non-Borel automorphisms between many quotient groups–
Theorem 13.2.3. A much stronger form of this property is 3,2-centeredness, in
whichanycollectionofthreepairwisecompatibleconditionshasalowerbound.
Such posets for example do not add linear orderings of quotient spaces except
for trivial reasons–Theorem 13.2.7.
Thereareanumberofpreservationpropertiesconcernedwithlocallycount-
able structures. They all consider posets of the form P (Definition 11.4.2)
KL
andstartwithahypothesisonthesimplicialcomplexK. Thus,Theorem11.4.5
shows thatifK isSuslin σ-centered thenuncountableBorelchromaticnumbers
of finitary hypergraphs are preserved by the poset P and Theorem 11.4.13
KL
proves the same for Suslin σ-linked complexes. There are a number of options,
and many classes of posets concerned are closed under the countable support
product. It seems difficult to get preservation theorems for locally countable
structureswithoutthetechnologyofiteratedverySuslinforcingsofChapter11.