=== 块 211 ===

elative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, the
E-quotient space is linearly ordered, and the orbit divide is preserved.
Proof. ThisisaconjunctionofExample8.6.5,Example9.2.11andTheorem9.4.4.

9.4. THE ORBIT DIVIDE 221
Corollary 9.4.11. Let Γ,∆ be abelian Polish groups, with Γ uncountable and
torsion-free and ∆ compact, nontrivial, and divisible.
1. Let P(Γ,∆) be the poset of Definition 8.2.1. In the P(Γ,∆)-extension of
the symmetric Solovay model, the orbit divide is preserved.
2. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds,
there is a discontinuous homomorphism from Γ to ∆, the orbit divide
is preserved.
Proof. This is a conjunction of Example 9.2.20 and Theorem 9.4.4.
Question9.4.12. DoestheexistenceofadiscontinuoushomomorphismfromR
to R imply in ZF+DC that |E |≤|E| holds for some orbit equivalence relation
1
E, or for E =F in particular? That E has a countable complete section?
2 1
Corollary 9.4.13. Let X be a Polish space.
1. In the extension of the Solovay model by the Kurepa poset of Defini-
tion 8.4.2, the orbit divide is preserved.
2. ItisconsistentrelativetoaninaccessiblecardinalthatZF+DCholds,there
is a Kurepa family on X, and the orbit divide is preserved.
Proof. This is a conjunction of Example 9.2.23 and Theorem 9.4.4.
Another group of nested balanced posets is obtained from orbit equivalence
relations:
Example 9.4.14. Let E ⊂F be Borel equivalence relations on a Polish space
X suchthatF ispinnedandBorelreducibletoanorbitequivalencerelation. Let
P be the E,F-transversal poset of Definition 6.6.5. Then P is nested balanced.
Proof. ByTheorem6.6.6,thebalancedvirtualconditionsareclassifiedbyfunc-
tions selecting, for each F-class, a single virtual E-class which is forced to be a
subsetoftheF-class. Letp∈P beacondition. Tofindanestbelowp,consider
any choice-coherent sequence (cid:104)M : n ∈ ω(cid:105) consisting of generic extensions of
n
the ground model such that for every n ∈ ω, 2ω ∩M \M (cid:54)= 0–the choice-
n n+1
coherent sequence of models obtained from the infinite product of Sacks reals
will do. Let ≺ be a coherent well-ordering of the space X. To find a coherent
sequence of balanced virtual conditions, in the model M consider the function
0
f on the F-quotient space defined as follows: if c is an F-class mentioned in
p, let f(c) be the E-class d ⊂ c which p selects. If c is a class represented in
M but not mentioned in p, then let f(c) be the E-class of the ≺-first repre-
ω
sentative of c in the model M . If n ∈ ω is the largest number such that c is
ω
represented in M , then let f(c) be the E-class of the ≺-first representative of
n
c in the model M . Now, by Theorem 4.3.6, this defines the function f on all
n
F-equivalence classes represented in M . It is also clear that for each n ≤ ω,
0
f (cid:22) M ∈ M . For each n ≤ ω, let p¯ be the virtual balanced condition in the
n n n
model M associated with the function f (cid:22)M by Theorem 6.6.6. The system
n n
(cid:104)M : n∈ω,p¯ : n≤ω(cid:105) is the sought nest below p.
n n