=== 块 151 ===

ple.
Definition 7.1.1. Let U be a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω. The symbol τ
U
denotes the Coll(ω,U)-name for the analytic collection of all infinite sets a⊂ω
which diagonalize the ultrafilter U.
157

158 CHAPTER 7. ULTRAFILTER FORCINGS
Theorem 7.1.2. Let P be the partial order of infinite subsets of ω, ordered by
inclusion.
1. The pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,U),τ (cid:105) is a balanced virtual condition for P for every
U
nonprincipal ultrafilter U on ω;
2. If (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) is a balanced pair for P, then there is a nonprincipal ultrafilter
U such that (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) is equivalent to (cid:104)Coll(ω,U),τ (cid:105);
U
3. distinct nonprincipal ultrafilters yield inequivalent balanced virtual condi-
tions.
In particular, the poset P is balanced.
Proof. For (1), note that the pair in fact is a virtual condition: in Coll(ω,U),
the set U is countable and so τ is an analytic subset of P, and the evaluation
U
ofτ doesnotdependontheparticulargenericfilteronthecollapseposet. The
U
balance of the pair follows immediately from Proposition 7.0.2 applied to U.
For (2), first use the balance of the name τ to note that for every set a⊂ω,
it must be the case that either Q (cid:13) τ ⊂ aˇ up to a finite set, or Q (cid:13) τ ∩aˇ is
finite. Let U be the set of all a ⊂ ω for which the first option occurs. It is
immediate that U is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω. The equivalence of (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105)
with (cid:104)Coll(ω,U),τ (cid:105) is immediately clear from Proposition 7.0.2.
U
For (3), not that if U ,U are distinct ultrafilters on ω then there is a set
0 1
a⊂ω such that a∈U and ω\a∈U . Thus the balanced names τ and τ
0 1 U0 U1
representincompatiblevirtualconditionsastheformerisbelowaandtheother
is below ω\a.
To prove the last sentence of the theorem, for any infinite set a⊂ω there is
a nonprincipal ultrafilter U containing a as an element. A reference to item (1)
then completes the argument.
7.2 Fubini powers of the Fr´echet ideal
The most natural attempt to force an ultrafilter which is not a P-point with a
σ-closed subset is encapsulated in the following definition.
Definition 7.2.1. For the duration of this section, write I to be the ideal on
ω×ω which is the Fubini product of the Fr´echet ideal on ω with itself. That
is, a set a ⊂ ω×ω belongs to the ideal I just in case a has only finitely many
infinite vertical sections. The Fin×Fin poset P isthe partial order of I-positive
sets, ordered by q ≤p if q\p∈I.
It is not difficult to see that P is a σ-closed forcing; the sets in the generic
filter on P form an ultrafilter disjoint from I. This ultrafilter, by virtue of the
partition of the domain set ω ×ω into the I-small vertical sections such that
everytransversalisagaininI,isnotaP-point;itsrichcombinatorialproperties
were investigated for example in [11, 89].