=== 块 23 ===

lates many distracting estimates needed in
thetraditionaltreatmentofturbulence,resultinginacleanandefficientgeneral
calculus.
Section 3.1 provides the motivating insight–namely, that building pairs of

1.6. NAVIGATION 19
models V[y ],V[y ] where y ∈ Y and y ∈ Y are separately Cohen generic
0 1 0 0 1 1
elementsoftheirrespectivePolishspacessuchthatV[y ]∩V[y ]=V dependson
0 1
asuitablenotionofawalk–Theorem3.1.4. Thecomparisonofgenericextensions
vis-a-vis their intersection is an important concern in the later parts of this
book. Section 3.2 provides two basic examples. In the first, Hjorth’s notion of
turbulence of group actions is restated in geometric terms–Theorem 3.2.2. The
secondexampleprovidesacompletecharacterizationofthoseanalyticidealson
ω such that it is possible to find points x ,x ∈ 2ω separately generic over V
0 1
such that they are equal modulo I and V[x ]∩V[x ]=V–Theorem 3.2.4.
0 1
Section 3.3 defines two classes of equivalence relations that are simple from
the turbulent point of view. An equivalence relation E on a Polish space X is
placid if any E-class represented in generic extensions with trivial intersection
is represented in the ground model. E is virtually placid if any virtual E-
class represented in such generic extensions is represented as a virtual class in
the ground model. These definitions are preserved under Borel reducibility and
undermanynaturaloperationsonequivalencerelations,asshowninSection3.4.
The main application is the generalization of an ergodicity theorem by Hjorth
and Kechris [52, Theorem 12.5] (Theorem 3.3.5): any Borel homomorphism
from a turbulent equivalence relation to a virtually placid one stabilizes on a
comeager set.
Section 3.5 provides a necessary complement to the forcing development
in this chapter: a theorem asserting that the notions introduced are abso-
lute among all generic extensions and evaluating their descriptive complexity–
Theorem 3.5.6. Finally, Section 3.6 develops turbulence of group actions for
measure. It turns out that the appropriate concept uses the familiar notion of
concentration of measure of [73].
Chapter 4 presents one of the entirely novel concepts of geometric set the-
ory: thatofacoherentnestedsequenceofmodelsofZFC,withemphasisonthe
intersection model. Thus, let (cid:104)M : n∈ω(cid:105) be an inclusion-decreasing sequence
n
(cid:84)
of transitive models of ZFC and consider the transitive class M = M .
ω n n
A simple coherence condition on the sequence guarantees that M is a model
ω
of ZF (Theorem 4.2.9); a coherence condition with a suitable well-ordering pa-
rameter guarantees that V is a model of ZFC–Theorem 4.3.2. In Section 4.2
ω
we develop the technology of building coherent sequences of generic extensions
(Theorem 4.2.8) and produce a case in which choice fails in the intersection
model. In Section 4.3 we develop a machinery of building choice-coherent se-
quencesofgenericextensions–Theorem4.3.5. Inprinciple,thereisawholefield
of coherent set theory hiding behind these concepts and the intersection mod-
els can serve as new vehicles for obtaining independence results. However, in
thischapterouremphasisisontheconnectionwithBorelequivalencerelations.
Our main result shows that the choice-coherent sequences of models detect the
difference between E and orbit equivalence relations: if E is an orbit equiva-
1
lence relation and C is a virtual E-class represented in each model V , then it
n
is represented in V –Theorem 4.3.6. This typically fails for E . The topic is
ω 1
revisited in Section 9.4 below.