=== 块 50 ===

relations which are not classifiable by countable
structures are often quite difficult to understand. To conclude this section, we
state another classification theorem and a couple of open questions.

2.5. CARDINAL INVARIANTS 49
Theorem2.4.10. LetE betheequivalencerelationonX =(P(ω))ω connecting
x ,x ifrng(x )andrng(x )generatethesamefilteronω. ThevirtualE-classes
0 1 0 1
are classified by filters on ω.
Proof. On one hand, if F is a filter on ω, one can consider the Coll(ω,F)-name
τ for a generic enumeration of the filter F. It is immediate that the name τ
F F
is E-pinned, and distinct filters yield inequivalent names.
For the more difficult part, suppose that P is a partial order and τ is an
E-pinned name on P; we must find a filter F on ω such that τ is equivalent
to τ . To do this, let F = {a ⊂ ω: ∃p p (cid:13) aˇ belongs to the filter generated
F
by rng(τ)}. By the pinned property of the name τ, the existential quantifier in
the definition of F can be replaced by universal without changing the resulting
set F. It follows immediately that the set F is a filter; we must show that τ is
equivalent to τ .
F
Supposetowardsacontradictionthatthisfails;thenitmustbethecasethat
for some condition p ∈ P and some number n ∈ ω, p forces τ(nˇ) to have no
subsetinthefilterF. Sincethenameτ isE-pinned,theremustexistconditions
p ,p ≤p and a finite set a⊂ω such that (cid:104)p ,p
(cid:105)(cid:13)(cid:84)
τ (m)⊂τ (nˇ).
0 1 0 1 m∈aˇ right left
Let b = {k ∈ ω: ∃r ≤ p r (cid:13) kˇ ∈ (cid:84) τ(m)} and let c = {k ∈ ω: p (cid:13)
1 m∈a 0
kˇ ∈ τ(nˇ)}. Observe that b ∈ F (since p (cid:13) (cid:84) τ(m) ⊂ ˇb) and c ∈/ F (since
1 m∈a
p (cid:13) cˇ⊂ τ). Thus, there has to be a number k ∈ b\c, and for this number k
0
there are conditions r ≤ p and r ≤ p such that r (cid:13) kˇ ∈ (cid:84) τ(m) and
0 0 1 1 1 m∈a
r (cid:13)kˇ ∈/ τ(nˇ). This,however,contradictsthechoiceoftheconditionsp ,p .
0 0 1
Consider the equivalence relation E of homeomorphism of compact metrizable
spaces. Thisisknowntobethelargestequivalencerelationreducibletoanorbit
equivalenceinthesenseofBorelreducibility[105]. Inanattempttodescribeits
virtualspace, consideranycompactHausdorffspaceX withatopologybasisof
size κ, and consider the Coll(ω,κ)-name τ for the interpretation of the space
X
X in the extension in the sense of [102]. The interpretation of X will have a
countable basis, so the interpretation will be a compact metrizable space. The
basictheoryofinterpretationsshowsthat(cid:104)Coll(ω,κ),τ (cid:105)isanE-pin. Themost
X
natural question is open:
Question 2.4.11. IseveryvirtualE-classrepresentedbyacompactHausdorff
space?
ThemeasureequivalenceE isoneofthehardestequivalencerelationstounder-
stand. It connects two Borel probability measures µ,ν on the Cantor space if
they share the same ideal of null sets. The relation F Borel reduces to E, so
2
E is not pinned.
Question 2.4.12. Classify the virtual space for the measure equivalence.
2.5 Cardinal invariants
There are several cardinal invariants of equivalence relations which are associ-
ated with the concept of virtual equivalence classes. They respect the Borel