=== 块 27 ===

are added by balanced forcing. In fact, no new
well-ordered sequences of elements of W are added–Theorem 9.1.1. This re-
sult is central for the rest of the book. Section 9.2 provides a very flexible

1.6. NAVIGATION 23
tool for verification of the inequality |E | > |2ω| in certain classes of balanced
0
extensions. Namely, it turns out that if the balanced classes of the forcing are
naturallyorganizedintoacompactHausdorffspace,thentheinequalityholdsin
the P-extension of the symmetric Solovay model–Theorem 9.2.2. The compact
Hausdorff space in question may certainly be nonmetrizable; in the case of the
posetP ofinfinitesubsetsofω orderedbyinclusion,itissimplytheCˇech–Stone
remainder of ω. Among the applications, it is possible to add linear ordering
to any Borel quotient space and preserve |E | > |2ω|–Corollary 9.2.12, or to
0
add a discontinuous homomorphism from R to R/Z and preserve |E | > |2ω|
0
as in Corollary 9.2.21. The inequality |E |>|2ω| can be verified in other ways
0
when the balanced classes do not form a compact Hausdorff space, for exam-
ple using Theorem 11.4.13 to maintain the chromatic number of the G -graph
0
uncountable which automatically implies |E |>|2ω| by Proposition 11.1.6(2).
0
Section 9.3 shows that the nonreducibility results obtained by Hjorth’s tur-
bulence method turn into cardinal inequalities in certain classes of balanced
extensions. The main contribution here is Definition 9.3.1, isolating the rel-
evant class of placid Suslin forcings. In placid extensions of the symmetric
Solovaymodel,noinequalitiesofthetype|E|≤|F|appearwhereE istheorbit
equivalence relation of a turbulent Polish group action, and F is an equivalence
relation classifiable by countable structures. A weakening of placidity is used
in Chapter ?? to rule out combinatorial objects from generic extensions which
have nothing to do with any group actions, such as nonprincipal ultrafilters.
Section 9.4 provides practical criteria for showing that the classical nonre-
ducibility of E to any orbit equivalence relation translates into cardinal in-
1
equalities in certain classes of balanced extensions of the Solovay model. This
turns out to require close study of nested sequences (cid:104)M : n ∈ ω(cid:105) of models of
n
ZFC as in Chapter 4. In particular, we must resolve the question whether, for
a given Σ2 sentence φ which is a consequence of the axiom of choice, one can
1
produce a set A such that for each n∈ω, the set A∩M belongs to M and is
n n
a witness for the sentence φ there. The resulting tricky combinatorial work can
be used to separate for example the existence of a Hamel basis from existence
of maximal acyclic subgraphs in Borel graphs.
Section 9.6 shows that the nonreducibility results between analytic equiva-
lence relations obtained by the comparisons of their cardinal invariants κ and
λ mostly turn into cardinal inequalities in the Solovay model W, and these
inequalities survive unharmed into the balanced extension.
Chapter10dealswiththequestionofwhethercountable-to-oneuniformiza-
tion and similar uniformization principles hold in the balanced forcing exten-
sions. Section10.1providestheapracticalcriteriononaSuslinforcingP which
impliesthatmanystronguniformizationprinciplesholdintheforcingextension
of the Solovay model by P. It turns out that the criterion is satisfied in a great
number of interesting cases, and its verification mostly follows from the careful
classificationofbalancedconditionsforP. AnumberofexamplesappearinSec-
tion10.5. Sections10.2, 10.3,and 10.4studyvariousuniformizationprinciples
in turn and show that they in fact hold in tethered extensions of the symmetric