=== 块 247 ===

e measured skew product H on a Polish space Y and a
continuous homomorphism h: Y →X of H to G.
We now include two definitions and related dichotomies which deal with the
clique number of Borel graphs.

260 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
Definition 11.1.23. Let G be an analytic graph on a Polish space X. We say
that G has Borel σ-bounded clique number if there are Borel sets B ⊂ X for
n
n∈ω such that no B contains a G-clique of size n+2.
n
Fact 11.1.24. Let G be an analytic graph on a Polish space X. Exactly one of
the following occurs:
1. G has Borel σ-bounded clique number;
2. there is a continuous homomorphism from a skew product of infinitely
many cliques of increasing finite size to G.
Definition 11.1.25. Let G be an analytic graph on a Polish space X. We say
thatGhasBorelσ-finitecliquenumber ifthereareBorelsetsB ⊂X forn∈ω
n
such that no B contains an infinite G-clique.
n
Fact 11.1.26. Let G be an analytic graph on a Polish space X. Exactly one of
the following occurs:
1. G has Borel σ-finite clique number;
2. there is a continuous homomorphism from a skew product of infinitely
many infinite cliques to G.
11.2 Very Suslin forcings
Thepreservationargumentsinthischapterareinspiritquitedifferentthanthose
in other chapters. All of them use definable c.c.c. control forcings. These are
posetsthatservetobuildinterestingbalancedconditionsinthecentralσ-closed
poset. We need to learn how to iterate the control forcings with finite support
while preserving their definability properties. We also need to isolate some
definable regularity properties of the control forcings and learn how to preserve
those. This last task is quite reminiscent of Stevo Todorcevic’s emphasis on
regularitypropertiesofc.c.c.posetsasexhibitedinnumerouspapersofhis–[93,
92]. However, we must stress that in our case the regularity properties must be
witnessed in a definable way, otherwise they are worthless. Similarly, our c.c.c.
control forcings are nearly all isomorphic to the product of continuum many
Cohen reals in ZFC; their worth for our purpose stems from their definability
properties as opposed to their forcing properties.
Definition 11.2.1. [44] A pre-ordering (cid:104)P,≤(cid:105) is a Suslin forcing if there is an
ambient Polish space X such that P ⊂ X is an analytic set, ≤ is an analytic
subset of X2, and the incompatibility relation ⊥ on P is an analytic subset of
X2. To ease the notational clutter, in this section we only require that ≤ is
a transitive relation on P containing the diagonal. In addition, the poset P is
required to have a largest element.