=== 块 242 ===

roposition will be useful at several points of this book:
Proposition 11.1.6. (ZF+DC) If the chromatic number of G is greater than
0
two then
1. there is no linear ordering of the E -quotient space;
0

11.1. CENTRAL OBJECTS AND NOTIONS 255
2. |E |(cid:54)≤|2ω|;
0
3. there is no discontinuous homomorphism between Polish groups.
Proof. For the first item, consider the equivalence relation E on 2ω connecting
pointsx,y ∈2ω iftheydifferinfinite, evennumberofentries. ThenE ⊂E ; as
0
asubsetofahyperfiniteequivalencerelation,itisitselfhyperfiniteandtherefore
Borel reducible to E [48, Theorem 8.1.1]. Now, suppose that the E -quotient
0 0
space is linearly orderable; then so is the E-quotient space, and one can define
the function c: 2ω → 2 by setting c(x) = 0 if among the two E-classes which
constitute the E -class of x, x belongs to the smaller one in the fixed linear
0
ordering of the E-quotient space. It is not difficult to show that c is a G -
0
coloring with two colors.
Theseconditemfollowsfromthefirst,sincetheinequality|E |≤|2ω|yields
0
a linear ordering on the E -space by simply pulling back the usual lexicograph-
0
ical order on 2ω to the E -quotient space via the assumed injection from the
0
E -quotient space to 2ω. The third item is much harder. [76] constructs, in
0
ZF+DC, a coloring of the Hamming graph H (a superset of the G -graph)
2 0
with two colors from the assumption that there is a discontinuous homomor-
phism between Polish groups.
It is not difficult to extend the G -dichotomy to arbitrary finitary analytic hy-
0
pergraphs. In this generality, one has to allow for uncountably many basis
hypergraphs, which are nevertheless easy to describe:
Definition 11.1.7. Suppose that (cid:104)a ,H ,t : n ∈ ω(cid:105) is a sequence such that
n n n
each a is a a finite set of cardinality at least two, H is the hypergraph on it
n n
(cid:81)
containing a as its only hyperedge, and t ∈ a is a string such that
n n m∈n m
(cid:83) (cid:81) (cid:81)
the set {t : n ∈ ω} is dense in a . Then the hypergraph H ,t
n n m∈n m n n n
(cid:81)
on a is called a principal skew product.
n n
ThefollowingcanbeprovedinthesamewayastheG -dichotomy. Wesuppress
0
the standard proof.
Fact 11.1.8. (ZF+DC) Let G be a finitary analytic hypergraph on a Polish
space X. Exactly one of the following occurs:
1. the Borel chromatic number of G is countable;
2. there exists a principal skew product and a continuous homomorphism of
it to the hypergraph G.
In this chapter, we will also use more involved variations of the uncountable
Borel chromatic number.
Definition 11.1.9. LetGbeananalyticfinitaryhypergraphonaPolishspace
X. ThehypergraphGhasBorel σ-bounded chromatic number ifthereareBorel
(cid:83)
sets B ⊂ X for n ∈ ω such that X = B and for every n ∈ ω, every finite
n n n
subset of B has G-chromatic number less than n+2.
n