=== 块 268 ===

s Γ on
Polishspaceswhilepreservingthemainfeaturesoflocallycountablestructures.
The main tool is the control forcing of finite approximations to such colorings,
as recorded in the following definition.

11.5. LARGER GRAPHS 281
Definition 11.5.1. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X. K is the
Γ
simplicialcomplexonX×ω consistingoffinitesetsa⊂X×ω whicharepartial
Γ-colorings. K is viewed as a poset ordered by reverse inclusion.
Γ
In order to extract desirable properties of the poset K , we deal with graphs
Γ
withforbiddensubgraphs. Thefollowingdefinitionrecordsthepatternswewish
to prohibit later; all of them are bipartite graphs.
Definition 11.5.2. Let n∈ω be a natural number.
1. K is the bipartite graph on 2×n connecting any pair of vertices with
n,n
distinct first coordinates;
2. K is the bipartite graph on the disjoint union of n and ω connecting
n,ω1 1
all elements of n to all elements of ω ;
1
3. K→ isthegraphon2×ω consistingofallpairs{(cid:104)0,m(cid:105),(cid:104)1,k(cid:105)}suchthat
ω,ω
m∈k.
Thefirstthreetheoremsofthissectiondealwiththedefinabilityandregularity
properties of the control forcing.
Theorem 11.5.3. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X which for some
n∈ω does not contain an injective homomorphic image of K . Then K is
n,ω1 Γ
a very Suslin c.c.c. partial ordering.
Note that in this case the graph Γ has countable coloring number by a result
of [25]. Observe also that the hypothesis on the graph is absolute throughout
all forcing extensions. It simply says that for all injective tuple (cid:126)x∈Xn, the set
{y ∈ X: ∀i ∈ n (cid:126)x(i) Γ y} is countable. By the perfect set theorem for Borel
sets, this is equivalent to the statement that for all injective tuples (cid:126)x∈Xn and
allcontinuousmapsπ: 2ω →X,eithertherearedistinctpointsz ,z ∈2ω such
0 1
that π(z ) = π(z ) or there is a point z ∈ 2ω and a number i ∈ n such that
0 1
π(z) Γ (cid:126)x(i) fails. A closer reading of the formula reveals that it is ≯1 and so
2
the Shoenfield absoluteness applies to it.
Proof. Write K = K . It is clear that K is a Suslin poset. For the c.c.c. part
Γ
of the theorem, let A={a : α∈ω } be an uncountable set; we must produce
α 1
two compatible elements in it. Let M be a countable elementary submodel of
a large structure containing Γ and A. Let α ∈ ω \M be any ordinal, and let
1
b = a (cid:22) M. By the elementarity of the model M, there have to be infinitely
α
many ordinals β such that b⊂a .
α
For each y ∈dom(a )\b, the set u ={x∈M ∩X: xΓy} must have size
α y
less than n: otherwise, one can find distinct elements {x : i∈n}⊂y and place
i
y in the set {z ∈ X: ∀i ∈ n x Γ z}. The latter set is countable by the initial
i
assumption on Γ, it is an element of the model M and by elementarity of M it
is a subset of M. This would contradict the choice of the point y.
Now, by elementarity of the model M, there is an ordinal β ∈M ∩ω such
1
(cid:83)
that b ⊂ dom(a ) and dom(a )∩ u = dom(b). It is not difficult to check
β β y y
that a ,a are compatible as desired.
α β