=== 块 253 ===

e analytic by Proposition 11.2.9.
nm
Claim 11.3.4. Let (cid:104)P : n∈ω,π ,ξ : m≤n∈ω(cid:105) be a very Suslin system
n nm mn
consisting of Suslin σ-linked forcings. Then the limit is Suslin σ-linked.

266 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
Proof. Let P be the limit of the system as described in Definition 11.2.12. Let
ω
(cid:83)
P = A : n ∈ ω be a cover by analytic linked sets for each n ∈ ω. For
n m nm
eachn,m∈ω letB ⊂P betheset{(cid:104)p,n(cid:105)∈P : p∈A }. Itisimmediate
nm ω ω nm
that these are linked analytic sets covering P .
ω
The theorem follows.
Theorem 11.3.5. The finite support product of countably many very Suslin,
Suslin σ-linked posets, if very Suslin, is Suslin σ-linked.
Proof. Let P for n ∈ ω be the very Suslin posets, with their Suslin σ-linked
n
propertywitnessedbysetsA form∈ω. Considerthefinitesupportproduct
nm
(cid:81)
Q = P and assume it is very Suslin. For each number n ∈ ω and each
n n 0
function h: n →ω let B ={q ∈Q: dom(q)=n∧∀m∈n q(m)∈A }.
0 h 0 m,h(m)
It is not difficult to verify that the sets B witness the Suslin σ-linked property
h
of the poset Q.
Definition 11.3.6. Let P be a Suslin forcing.
1. A set A⊂P is centered if any finite subset of A has a lower bound in P;
2. TheposetP isSuslin σ-centered ifP canbewrittenasacountableunion
(cid:83)
A and the sets A are analytic and centered.
n n n
The key feature of the Suslin σ-centered property is that it is preserved under
the finite support iterations of very Suslin forcings. The proof of the following
theorems are literally copied from Theorems 11.3.2 and 11.3.5, replacing the
word “linked” with “centered”.
Theorem 11.3.7. Let P be a very Suslin c.c.c. forcing which is Suslin σ-
centered. Let α ∈ ω be a countable ordinal. Then the finite support iteration
1
of P of length α is a Suslin σ-centered forcing.
Theorem 11.3.8. The finite support product of countably many very Suslin,
Suslin σ-centered posets, if very Suslin, is Suslin σ-centered.
NextcomesaregularitypropertyofSuslinforcingnotionsmorepermissivethan
centeredness or linkedness, which should be compared to [86, Definition 3].
Definition 11.3.9. Let P be a Suslin forcing.
1. A set A ⊂ P is Ramsey-centered if for every number r ∈ ω there is
k ∈ω such that every k-tuple (with possible repetitions) of elements of A
contains an r-tuple with a common lower bound.
(cid:83)
2. P is Suslin σ-Ramsey-centered if there is a cover P = A by analytic
n n
Ramsey-centered sets.
Note that the definitory properties of the covers are Π1 and therefore persist
2
to all forcing extensions. The most important result of this section is that
the Suslin Ramsey-centeredness is a property preserved under finite support
iterations of very Suslin forcings.