=== 块 26 ===

3showsthatitispossibletoforceanontrivialauto-
morphism of the Boolean algebra P(ω) modulo finite with a balanced forcing.
The forcing consists simply of countable approximations ordered by reverse in-

22 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
clusion, and balanced conditions correspond exactly to automorphisms of the
algebra–Theorem 8.3.3. Section 8.4 considers the problem of adding a cofinal
Kurepa family on a Polish space with a balanced poset. Again, the natural
countable approximation poset works, and there is a very simple classification
theorem for the balanced conditions–Theorem 8.4.3. Section 8.5 presents bal-
anced forcings for adding set mappings on Polish spaces without nontrivial free
sets.
Section8.6showshowonecanaddsaturatedmodelsoffirstordertheoriesto
E-quotient spaces for a Borel equivalence relation E. An especially interesting
case is adding a saturated limit of a Fraiss´e class with strong amalgamation;
i.e. a linear ordering, a tournament, or similar structures (Theorem 8.6.4). In
this section, the amalgamation problems familiar from model theory and the
amalgamation questions arising in geometric set theory exhibit a particularly
strong affinity.
Section8.7showsthattherearebalancedorderingswhichproduceextensions
of the symmetric Solovay model in which the Axiom of Dependent Choices
fails. Theseminalexampleisthefinite-countableposetofDefinition8.7.1which
introducesapartitionofanuncountablePolishspaceintotwoparts,oneofthem
without a perfect subset and the other without countably infinite set.
Section 8.8 introduces several balanced posets which in the usual ZFC con-
text would be viewed as “side condition” forcings. The general Definition 8.8.1
providesageneralconstructionforaddinganuncountablesetwhoseintersection
with every set in I is countable, where I is a given ideal generated by closed
sets. Theorem8.8.6showshowtoaddaspecialtypeofaLusinset. Theforcings
mostly serve as delimiting examples in Chapter ??.
Section 8.9 provides two examples of weakly balanced forcings, achieving
what balanced forcing cannot do. In the first case (Theorem 8.9.2) we con-
struct a weakly balanced poset which collapses |E| to |E , for any given Borel
0
equivalence relation E. This breaks the Friedman–Stanley jump barrier which
is one of the basic features of the balanced extensions of the Solovay model
by Corollary 9.1.5. The second example (Theorem 8.9.7) is a weakly balanced
poset adding a maximal almost disjoint family, an object one cannot find in
balanced extensions of the Solovay model by Theorem 14.1.1. In general, the
weakly balanced arguments are much more difficult than the balanced ones.
Chapter 9 compares cardinalities ofquotient spacesin thebalanced exten-
sions of the symmetric Solovay model W. On the surface, this is an enterprise
very similar to the traditional forcing concerns in the context of the axiom
of choice. However, it is important to understand that the non-well-ordered
quotient cardinals offer many more opportunities for meaningful independence
work and also for surprising ZF results preventing various patterns of cardinal
collapses.
Section 9.1 shows that no new inequalities between well-ordered cardinali-
ties and quotient cardinalities are added by balanced forcing. In fact, no new
well-ordered sequences of elements of W are added–Theorem 9.1.1. This re-
sult is central for the rest of the book. Section 9.2 provides a very flexible