=== 块 278 ===

. Again, let P be the collapse as defined in Definition 6.6.2. Recall
E
that its balanced conditions are classified by injections from the E-quotient
space to the E -quotient space by Theorem 6.6.3.
0

11.6. COLLAPSES 291
Theorem 11.6.5. Let E be a pinned Borel equivalence relation on a Polish
space X. Let G be a finitary analytic hypergraph on a Polish space Y of un-
countable Borel chromatic number. In the P -extension of the Solovay model,
E
G has uncountable chromatic number.
Proof. Consider the control poset Q: it consists of conditions q such that for
some number n
q
∈ω, q is a finite partial function from X to 2nq. The ordering
is defined by r ≤ q if n ≤ n , dom(q) ⊆ dom(r), for every x ∈ dom(q),
q r
q(x) ⊆ r(x), and for every pair x ,x ∈ dom(q) of E-related points and for
0 1
every m∈n \n , r(x )(m)=r(x )(m).
r q 0 1
Claim 11.6.6. Q is a very Suslin, Suslin σ-centered poset.
Proof. It is immediate that Q is a Suslin poset. For the very Suslin part,
supposethata⊂Qisacountableset. Itisnot difficulttocheckthatifthere is
aconditionq ∈Qwhichisincompatiblewithallconditionsina,thentheremust
(cid:83)
be such a condition q with dom(q) ⊂ dom(r). There are only countably
r∈a
many conditions satisfying the latter formula, and the search in this countable
set for one which is incompatible with all elements of a is a Borel procedure.
FortheSuslinσ-centeredpropertyoftheposetQ,adescriptor ofacondition
q ∈Qisafunctionhwhosedomainisafinitecollectionofpairwisedisjointbasic
open subsets of X such that for each O ∈ dom(h) there is exactly one point
x of dom(q) in O, and for each point of dom(q) belongs to one set in dom(h);
O
moreover, h(O) = q(x ). It is immediate that the set of all conditions with a
O
given descriptor is Borel and σ-centered, every condition has many descriptors,
and there are only countably many possible descriptors in all. Therefore, Q is
Suslin σ-centered as required.
Note that the poset Q adds an injection from the ground model E-classes
to the collection of E -classes which are not represented in the ground model.
0
We denote the name for the injection by η; thus η([xˇ] ) is forced to be the
E
E -class of the point y = (cid:83) {r(x): r is in the generic filter}. Now, let R be the
0
finitesupportiterationoftheposetQoflengthω , addingfunctionsη ateach
1 α
stage of the iteration; we denote by V the generic extension obtained after the
α
α-th stage of the iteration. Let p∈P be any condition. Let σ be the R-name
E
for the injection from the E-quotient space to the E -quotient space defined by
0
σ(c) = a (c) whenever c is an E-class in the domain of a , and σ(c) = η (c)
p p α
whenever c is an E-class which is not in the domain of a and α ∈ ω is the
p 1
first ordinal such that c has a representative in the model V . It is clear that σ
α
is a name for an injection from the E-quotient space to the E -quotient space
0
compatible with the condition p.
The rest of the proof follows closely the argument for Theorem 11.4.5 and
we omit it.
Corollary 11.6.7. Let E be a pinned Borel equivalence relation. Let G be an
analyticfinitaryhypergraphonaPolishspace, withuncountableBorelchromatic
number. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds,
|E|≤|E | and the chromatic number of G is uncountable.
0