=== 块 6 ===

mately connected to various contemporary
concerns of descriptive set theory and analysis. A very detailed structure ap-
pears, with some fracture lines running in parallel to existing combinatorial,
1

2 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
algebraic, or analytic concepts and other fracture lines showing up in places
quite unexpected. The main geometric motif is the following. Given a Σ2 sen-
1
tenceφ=∃A⊂X ψ(A), aconsequenceoftheAxiomofChoiceinwhichX isa
Polishspaceandψ isaformulaquantifyingonlyoverelementsofPolishspaces,
and given a configuration {M : i ∈ I} of transitive models of set theory with
i
choice, is there a set A⊂X such that in all (or many) models M in the config-
uration, A∩M ∈M and A∩M is a witness to φ in the model M? The answer
to this question is surprisingly varied and successful in separating consequences
of the Axiom of Choice of this syntactical complexity.
The models of ZF we use for the independence results are nearly exclusively
ofthesameform: theyareextensionsofthesymmetricSolovaymodelbyasim-
plydefinableσ-closedforcing. Asaresult,theyareallmodelsofDC,theAxiom
of Dependent Choices. DC is instrumental for developing the basic concepts of
mathematical analysis, thus highly desirable; at the same time, it is an axiom
which is difficult to obtain in the symmetric models of 1970’s. If suitable large
cardinals are present, essentially identical effects can be obtained in generic ex-
tensions of the model L(R) which have a very strong claim to canonicity. In
addition, given Σ2 sentences φ ,φ , there is usually a quite canonical choice
1 0 1
for a forcing which should generate a model of ZF+DC+¬φ +φ . The whole
0 1
analysis of the forcing in question takes place in ZFC, using central concepts of
the fields related to the Σ2 sentences in question.
1
Weconcludethisbriefoutlineoftheareawiththeobservationthatthemass
ofnaturalquestionsthateitherseemtobetreatableusingthegeometricmethod,
or are generated by the inner workings of the geometric method, is entirely
overwhelming. This book cannot be more than a relatively brief introduction
to the subject. In many directions, our efforts faded due to sheer exhaustion
and not because of insurmountable obstacles. We hope to motivate the reader
to explore the enormous, inviting expanses of geometric set theory.
1.2 Equivalence relation results
The first group of results deals with the simplest geometric concern. If E is an
analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space, and V[H ],V[H ] are mutually
0 1
generic extensions of V, is it possible to find an E-class which is represented in
both V[H ] and V[H ] but not in V? Kanovei [48, Chapter 17], continuing the
0 1
seminal work of Hjorth, defined an analytic equivalence E to be pinned just in
case the answer is negative.
InChapter2, wedevelopthenotionofthevirtualquotientspaceforagiven
analyticequivalencerelationonaPolishspace. AvirtualE-classisonewhichis
represented in some mutually generic extensions of V; from a different angle, it
is a class which may be represented only in some generic extension, but it does
notdependonthechoiceofthegenericfilter. Aformaldefinitionusesthenotion
of an E-pin and an equivalence on the class of E-pins, which naturally extends
theanalyticequivalencerelationE intothetransfinitedomain–Definitions2.1.1
and 2.1.4. The virtual E-quotient space is then the class of all E-pins up to