=== 块 9 ===

toHjorthandKechris[52,
Theorem12.5], wedeveloptheclassesofplacidandvirtuallyplacidequivalence
relations (the latter including all equivalence relations classifiable by countable
structures) and prove:

1.3. INDEPENDENCE: BY TOPIC 5
Theorem 1.2.8. (Theorem 3.3.5) Let E be the orbit equivalence relation on
a Polish space X resulting from a turbulent Polish group action. Let F be
an analytic, virtually placid equivalence relation on a Polish space Y and let
h: X → Y be a Borel homomorphism of E to F. Then there is an F-class
whose h-preimage is comeager in X.
Itturnsoutthatthereisaversionofturbulenceformeasurewhichleadstomany
of the same ergodicity results. It uses the notion of concentration of measure
quite close to the abstract whirly actions on measure algebras isolated in [33].
Theorem 1.2.9. (Theorem 3.6.2) Let Γ be a Polish group continuously acting
on a Polish space X with an invariant Borel probability measure and an invari-
ant ultrametric. Suppose that the action has concentration of measure. Then
V[x]∩V[γ·x] whenever x∈X is a random point and γ ∈Γ is a generic point
mutually generic with x.
As usual with the forcing reconceptualizations of various notions in descriptive
settheory, wehavetoshowthattheresultingnotionsaresuitablyabsoluteand
evaluate their complexity–Theorem 3.5.6.
Chapter4addressesinfiniteconfigurationsoftransitivemodelsofZFC.The
most important case is in which there is an infinite inclusion-descending se-
quence (cid:104)M : n ∈ ω(cid:105) of models. Under suitable, commonly satisfied coherence
n
(cid:84)
assumptions (Definition 4.2.1 or 4.3.1), the intersection M is a model of
n n
ZF or even ZFC. We spend some time developing a flexible technology of con-
structing nontrivial coherent sequences as in Theorem 4.3.5. The breakthough
achieved in this chapter is the theorem showing that similar configurations de-
tect the distinction between equivalence relations induced as orbit equivalences
of continuous actions of Polish groups, and those which are not reducible to
orbit equivalence relations:
Theorem 1.2.10. (Theorem 4.3.6) Let (cid:104)M : n ∈ ω(cid:105) be a choice-coherent se-
n
quence of models of ZFC. Let E be an orbit equivalence relation of a continuous
(cid:84)
Polish group action with a code in the intersection model M . If a virtual
n n
E-class has a representative in every model M , then it has a representative in
n
(cid:84)
the intersection model M .
n n
Recall that the canonical equivalence relation not reducible to an orbit equiv-
alence relation is E . It is not difficult to construct a choice-coherent sequence
1
of models (cid:104)M : n ∈ ω(cid:105) and an E -class which is represented in each model on
n 1
(cid:84)
the sequence but not in the intersection model M –Example 4.3.10.
n n
1.3 Independence: by topic
Our concerns in the part of the book that deals with independence results in
ZF+DC can be grouped into several large areas.
Cardinalities of quotient spaces. Mirroring the traditional concerns of de-
scriptive set theory, we work on cardinalities of quotient spaces of Borel equiv-