=== 块 30 ===

proach the task from exactly orthogonal
directions.
Section 12.1 isolates the classes of perfectly balanced and perfect forcings.
Themaininhabitantoftheseclassesistheorderingofinfinitesubsetsofnatural

26 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
numbers ordered by inclusion. However, it turns out that most natural partial
ordersforaddingultrafiltersareperfectlybalanced. Extensionsofthesymmetric
Solovay model by perfectly balanced forcings satisfy a strong form of Silver
dichotomy: every uncountable subset of a Borel quotient space contains an
injective copy of 2ω (Theorem 12.1.6). Among other effects, they also satisfy a
strong form of the Open Coloring Axiom–Theorem 12.1.8.
Section 12.2 presents the dual class of Bernstein balanced forcings. It is
very rich, including the placid posets, but also posets for adding transcendence
bases for Polish fields, or posets adding Fraiss´e structures on Borel quotient
spaces. The preservation theorems show in particular that their extensions
do not contain nonprincipal ultrafilters (Theorem 12.2.3 or satisfy the Open
ColoringAxiom(Theorem12.2.5). Theextensionsalsoexhibitpropertieswhich
areincertainsensedualtoknownZFCindependenceresults. Forexample,every
unbounded subset of ωω under the modulo finite domination order contains a
bounded uncountable subset–Theorem 12.2.7.
Section12.3containspreservationresultsthatsettheclassofplacidforcings
apart from the much larger class of Bernstein balanced forcings. In particular,
placid forcings do not add algebraic transcendence bases to uncountable Polish
fields(Theorem12.3.1). Thisyieldsoneofthemoststrikingresultsofthisbook:
inZF+DC,existenceofHamelbasesforBorelvectorspacesovercountablefields
does not imply existence of transcendence bases for Polish fields over countable
subfields(Corollary12.3.8). Placidforcingsalsodonotaddcoloringstoagreat
numberofgraphswhichhavecountablecoloringnumberinZFC.Theorem12.3.5
deals with an interesting class of graphs of this type, obtained from algebraic
curves in R2.
ThedualitybetweenperfectlybalancedandBernsteinbalancedposetscomes
tofullviewinSection12.4. ItturnsoutthatthegenericfiltersforBernsteinbal-
ancedforcingsandperfectlybalancedforcingsareoftenautomaticallymutually
generic–Theorem 12.4.12. This is the most precise and elegant way of framing
intuitions like “ultrafilters and transcendence bases for fields have nothing to
do with each other”. At the same time, filters for Bernstein balanced forcings
generic over L(R) exist as a matter of ZFC plus large cardinals, without regard
to the structure of continuum issues–Theorem 12.4.2. Thus, we get say generic
HamelbasesforvectorspacesorgenerictranscendencebasesforPolishfieldsin
ZFC plus large cardinals. This contrasts with the perfectly balanced ultrafilter
posets, where a long line of ZFC independence results may be interpreted as
showing that generic filters for these posets consistently fail to exist.
Chapter ?? presents the classes of m,n-balanced and centered forcings.
These classes serve to separate combinatorial objects of different arity of orga-
nization. The reader has to keep in mind that the notion of arity used here is
quite abstract or even somewhat ineffable.
Section 13.2 contains the main preservation results. The raison d’etre of
the classes of forcings under discussion is Theorem 13.2.1 which shows that
n+1,n-balanced forcings do not add discontinuous homomorphisms between
Polish groups. This means that in particular no nonprincipal ultrafilters on ω