=== 块 308 ===

of Martin’s Axiom and the
negationofthecontinuumhypothesisimpliesthateverysetofsizeℵ ismeager
1
??? and so no Lusin set exists. In such circumstances, there cannot be a filter
on P generic over L(R).

12.4. EXISTENCE OF GENERIC FILTERS 323
Example 12.4.10. Consider the clopen graph Γ on 2ω connecting points x (cid:54)=
0
x ifthesmallestn∈ω suchthatx (n)(cid:54)=x (n)iseven. LetP bethebalanced
1 0 1
posetofExample8.8.3. ItisnotBernsteinbalancedbyExample12.2.16above.
In the P-extension of L(R), there is an uncountable set A⊂2ω such that every
Γ-clique and every Γ-anticlique in it is countable. Now, since the graph Γ is
clopen, closures of both Γ-cliques and Γ-anticliques are cliques and anticliques
respectively. Thus, the stated property of A holds also in V. At the same
time, it is consistent that OCA holds in V [91]. In such circumstances, every
uncountable subset of Γ must contain either a Γ-clique or an uncountable Γ-
anticlique and therefore a P-generic filter over V cannot exist.
TheclassesofBernsteinbalancedandsoftSuslinforcingsdonotcoincide,which
leads to the following question about the existence of generic filters for a par-
ticularly simple Bernstein balanced Suslin poset which is not soft.
Question 12.4.11. (In the context of ZFC+suitable large cardinal assump-
tion.) Is there a tournament on the F -quotient space which is generic over
2
L(R) for the poset of Example 8.6.6?
Weconcludethissectionwithamutual genericityresultfor Bernsteinbalanced
and perfectly balanced forcings.
Theorem 12.4.12. Let κ be a weakly compact Woodin cardinal. Let P ,P be
0 1
σ-closed Suslin forcings such that
1. P ,P are ℵ -tethered;
0 1 0
2. P is perfect;
0
3. every balanced virtual condition in P is Bernstein balanced.
1
If G ⊂ P and G ⊂ P are filters (in V) separately generic over L(R), then
0 0 1 1
they are mutually generic over L(R).
Proof. Westartwithapreliminaryobservation. Letp¯ bethevirtualcondition
0
in P consisting of a collapse name for the set of all lower bounds of the filter
0
G ; let p¯ be defined similarly. By the σ-closure assumption, both p¯ , p¯ are
0 1 0 1
nonzero conditions. Since the filter G is generic over L(R), for every analytic
0
set A ⊂ P there is a condition in G which is either incompatible with all
0 0
elements of A or is stronger than some element of A. By the ℵ -tether of the
0
poset P , it must then be the case that p¯ is a balanced virtual condition in P .
0 0 0
By the same reasoning, p¯ is a balanced virtual condition in P , and it is even
1 1
Bernstein balanced by the assumption (3).
Now, let X be any uncountable Polish space. In view of Proposition 1.7.8
applied in the model L(R), it is enough to show that for any two disjoint sets
A ,A ⊂X in the respective models L(R)[G ], L(R)[G ], there is a set B ⊂X
0 1 0 1
inL(R)containingA anddisjointfromA . Tothisend,letτ ,τ berespective
1 0 0 1
P ,P -namesinL(R)suchthatA =τ /G andA =τ . Thenamesτ ,τ can
0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1
be viewed as sets of reals, and so each has a definition in L(R) from real and