=== 块 21 ===

s concerned are closed under the countable support
product. It seems difficult to get preservation theorems for locally countable
structureswithoutthetechnologyofiteratedverySuslinforcingsofChapter11.

1.6. NAVIGATION 17
1.6 Navigation
The structure of the book is quite complicated and some navigation advice will
greatlyenhancethereader’sexperience. PartIcontainsresultsaboutreducibil-
ityofBorelandanalyticequivalencerelationsandhowamalgamationproperties
of models of set theory can be used to disprove it. Part II provides all of the
choicelessindependenceresults. ItisdifficulttoappreciatethemethodsofPart
II without having basic acquiantance with the concepts introduced in Part I.
Still, Part I should be viewed as only the gate to Cantor’s paradise, while Part
II is already within the gates.
Chapter 2 defines and explores the notion of the virtual quotient space for
an analytic equivalence relation E on a Polish space X. On an intuitive level, a
virtual equivalence class is one which may only exist in some forcing extension
but still we already have a sensible calculus for speaking about it.
Section 2.1 provides the basic definitions. If P is a partial order and τ
is a P-name for an element of X, the name is called E-pinned if its E-class
does not depend on the generic filter on P. There is a natural equivalence E¯
on pinned names, and the E¯ equivalence classes are referred to as the virtual
E-classes. Section 2.2 shows that if one has a definable structure on the E-
quotient space, it is possible to consider the virtual version of that structure
on the virtual quotient space. This is a structure Π -elementarily equivalent to
1
the original one. Structures such as virtual versions of partially ordered sets of
Borel simplicial complexes will come handy later in the book.
Sections 2.3 and 2.4 deal with the most immediate concern: the classifi-
cation problem for the virtual quotient spaces. The virtual equivalence classes
shouldcorrespondtosomeimmediatelyrecognizablecombinatorialobjects,and
inmanyimportantcasesthishopeisfulfilled. Inabroadclassofequivalencere-
lations(thepinnedequivalencerelationsof[48,Section17])thevirtualquotient
space is simply identical to the quotient space. Many jump-type operations on
equivalence relations have a natural translation to operations on virtual quo-
tient spaces; for example, the Friedman–Stanley jump [31] is translated to a
powerset operation–Theorem 2.3.4. Virtual classes of isomorphism relations on
countablestructuresnaturallycorrespondtouncountablestructuresofthesame
type (Theorem 2.4.5), even though in some cases there may be mysterious vir-
tual classes which are not classified in this way [50]. Still, there are many wide
open questions. For example, we do not know how to classify the virtual quo-
tientspaceforthemeasureequivalence. Thevirtualspaceofhomomorphismof
second countable compact Hausdorff spaces sems to be naturally classified by
compact Hausdorff spaces, but there is no theorem to that effect.
Section 2.5 deals with the next most natural concern: the attempt to size
up the virtual quotient space in terms of cardinality. The effort is surprisingly
successful,generatingcardinalinvariantsofanalyticequivalencerelationswhich
cantakeallkindsofexoticandinformativevalues. Givenananalyticequivalence
relation E, one defines the pinned cardinal κ(E) as the minimal cardinal such
thatallvirtualclassesofE arerepresentedbynamesonposetsofsize<κ. One