=== 块 259 ===

(cid:105) there is a set A as in (1) such that the
balanced pairs (cid:104)Q,σ(cid:105) and (cid:104)Coll(ω,X),Aˇ(cid:105) are equivalent;
3. distinct sets as in (1) yield inequivalent balanced pairs.

272 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
In order to identify properties of the poset P in the Solovay model, we have
KL
to analyze its very Suslin c.c.c. control poset which in this case is simply the
partialorderK orderedbyreverseinclusion. NotethatthesetLdoesnotenter
the definition of the control poset at all. The following proposition verifies the
basic property of the control poset.
Proposition 11.4.4. Let K be a Borel locally countable simplicial complex on
a Polish space X. Then K is a very Suslin c.c.c. forcing.
Proof. Write E = E ; this is a Borel countable equivalence relation on the
K
space X. Observe that for an E-invariant set C ⊂ X, K∩P(C) is a regular
subposet of K. It is certainly closed under unions in K. Now suppose that
a∈K is any condition and let b=a∩C. Whenever c⊃b is some condition in
K∩P(C), a∪c ∈ K holds. To see this, recall that a∪c belongs to K just in
caseitsintersectionwitheveryE-classis. Now, ifdisanE-class, ifd⊂C then
(a∪c)∩d=c∈K, and if d∩C =0 then (a∪c)∩d=a∈K holds again. The
regularity of K∩P(C) in K has just been proved.
Toverifythec.c.c.partoftheproposition,letA⊂Kisamaximalantichain
and let M be a countable elementary submodel of a large structure containing
A,E, and K. By the elementarity of M, the set A∩M is a maximal antichain
in the poset K∩M = K∩P(X ∩M). Since E is an equivalence relation with
allclassescountable,theelementarityofM showsthatX∩M isanE-invariant
set. By the previous paragraph then, A∩M is a maximal antichain in K. As a
result, A∩M =A and so A is countable.
To verify the very Suslin part of the proposition, let A ⊂ K be a countable
set. To check that A is a maximal antichain in K, it is only necessary to
check that it is a maximal antichain in the poset K ∩P(C), where C is the
(cid:83)
E-saturation of A by the first paragraph of the proof. Such a verification is
a Borel procedure as all E-classes are countable.
The key point in all subsections below will be the identification of some Suslin
forcing preservation properties of the control poset and their connection to the
forcing properties of the poset P in the Solovay model.
KL
11.4a Suslin σ-centered complexes
TheresultsofthissectionshowthatincertainextensionsoftheSolovaymodel,
uncountable chromatic numbers of analytic hypergraphs of finite arity do not
change at all. This is the content of the following theorem.
Theorem 11.4.5. Let (cid:104)K,L(cid:105) be a locally countable pair. Suppose that the
simplicial complex K is Suslin σ-centered. Suppose that G is a analytic finitary
hypergraph of uncountable Borel chromatic number. Then in the P -extension
KL
of the Solovay model, the chromatic number of G is uncountable.
Proof. As a preliminary consideration, it is clear from Fact 11.1.8 that it is
enough to consider the case of G which is a principal skew product as in Defi-
nition 11.1.7. Let (cid:104)a ,H ,t : n ∈ ω(cid:105) be a sequence such that H = {a } and
n n n n n
(cid:81)
G= H ,t .
n n n