=== 块 186 ===

ch the first
option prevails; we will show that Q×S (cid:13) σ ≤ τ , showing that the balanced
a
pairs(cid:104)Q,σ(cid:105)and(cid:104)Coll(ω,2ω),τ (cid:105)areequivalentbyProposition5.2.4. Toseethe
a

8.9. WEAKLY BALANCED VARIATIONS 195
inequality,itisonlynecessarytoshowthatthesecondclauseoftheseconditem
above is impossible for any closed nowhere dense set s ⊂ (2ω)n in the ground
model. Suppose towards a contradiction that the second clause occurs. This
can only happen if there is a Q-name h˙ such that Q forces h˙: n → 2ω to be a
partialmapsuchthatrng(h)consistsofpairwisenon-E -equivalent,non-ground
0
model elements of a such that either (if dom(h)=n) h∈s or (if dom(h)(cid:54)=n)
σ
the set s contains a nonempty open set. In either case, let G ,G ⊂ Q be
h 0 1
mutuallygenericfilters,andusethethirditemtofindaseta∈V[G ]suchthat
0
(cid:104)a,s(cid:105) ∈ b . Then by mutual genericity the set rng(h˙/G ) consists of points
σ/G0 1
whicharenotina. Thismeansthattheconditionsσ/G ,σ/G areincompatible
0 1
in P, contradicting the balance assumption on the pair (cid:104)Q,σ(cid:105).
(3) is immediate. For the last sentence, if p ∈ P is a condition, it is not
difficult to see that S forces pˇto be compatible with τ . The name for a lower
ap
bound is a balanced virtual condition below p.
8.9 Weakly balanced variations
There are a number of restrictions on the balanced extensions of the Solovay
model–Corollaries 9.1.2, 9.1.5 or Theorems 14.1.1 or 14.2.1 are good examples.
Transcending these restrictions requires reaching for a weakly balanced forcing.
The weakly balanced arguments are invariably more complicated than the bal-
anced ones, and we never obtain a classification of weakly balanced classes. We
include two examples reminiscent of the side condition forcings of Section 8.8.
The first poset adds an injection from the E-quotient space to the E -quotient
0
space, where E is any give Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space. For
a pinned equivalence relation E this is possible to do with a balanced forcing,
see Theorem 6.6.3; in the general case, this is impossible to do with balanced
forcing by Theorem 9.1.1.
Definition 8.9.1. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space X.
The Lusin collapse forcing P is the poset of all triples p = (cid:104)a ,b ,f (cid:105) where
E p p p
(cid:104)a ,b (cid:105) is a condition in the Lusin forcing of Definition 8.8.5, and f is an
p p p
injection from the E-space to the set of E -classes represented in a . The order
0 p
is that of coordinatewise reverse inclusion.
It is not difficult to see that P is a σ-closed Suslin partial order and if G⊂P is
(cid:83)
a generic filter then f = f is a total injection from the E-quotient space
p∈G p
totheE -quotientspace. ItisinstructivetoviewtheposetP asanaturaltwo-
0 E
step iteration. The first step is the (balanced) Lusin poset of Definition 8.8.5
adding a subset A of the E -quotient space. In the second step, an injection of
0
the E-quotient space into A is added by straightforward countable approxima-
tions. The projection from P into the Lusin poset is given by the projection
E
of conditions in p into the first two coordinates.
Theorem 8.9.2. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space X.
The Lusin collapse forcing of |E| to |E | is weakly balanced.
0