=== 块 160 ===

ssume that τ sorts out P(Γ)∩V. Let σ be the Q-name for the collection of all
sets in P(Γ)∩V which τ accepts.
Claim 7.4.9. The membership of every set A⊂Γ in σ is decided by the largest
condition in Q.

7.4. SEMIGROUP ULTRAFILTERS 167
Proof. If not, then there is a set A ⊂ Γ and conditions q ,q ∈ Q such that
0 1
q (cid:13) Aˇ ∈ σ and q (cid:13) Γ\Aˇ ∈ σ. Plainly, the condition (cid:104)q ,q (cid:105) forces in the
0 1 0 1
product Q×Q that τ ,τ are conditions incompatible in P , contradicting
left right Γ
the balance assumption on the name τ.
Let U = {A ⊂ Γ: Q (cid:13) Aˇ ∈ σ}. This is an ultrafilter on Γ. By Propo-
sition 7.4.5, it is an idempotent ultrafilter. By Claim 7.4.8, the pair (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) is
equivalent to (cid:104)Coll(ω,P(Γ)),τ (cid:105). (2) follows.
U
(3) is immediate. To prove the last sentence, note that for every condition
p ∈ P , the Ellis–Numakura theorem yields an idempotent ultrafilter U such
Γ
(cid:81)
that for all n ∈ ω, the set { p(m): a ⊂ ω is a nonempty finite set and
m∈a
min(a) > n} belongs to U. Then Coll(ω,P(Γ)) (cid:13) Στ ≤ p by the definition of
U
theorderingP andso(cid:104)Coll(ω,P(Γ)),τ (cid:105)isabalancedvirtualconditionbelow
Γ U
p.
Example 7.4.10. LetΓbethegroupoffinitesubsetsofω withthesymmetric
difference operation. Consider the poset P below the natural initial condition
Γ
p∈Γω which assigns the singleton set {n} to each number n∈ω. The generic
ultrafilteraddedbytheposetisknownasthestableorderedunionultrafilteras
introduced in [10]. The stable union ultrafilters are studied in many places in
theliterature,includingthestudyoftheP -extensionofthesymmetricSolovay
Γ
model [22].

168 CHAPTER 7. ULTRAFILTER FORCINGS

Chapter 8
Other forcings
Inthischapterwegatherpartialorderswhichdonotfitinthepreviouschapters.
8.1 Chromatic numbers
Given a Polish space X, a Borel hypergraph Γ ⊂ [X]<ℵ0, one can consider the
task of forcing a Γ-coloring c: X →ω. In principle, this is a very difficult task
andwedonothaveageneralwayofresolvingit. Thefirstposetonecanconsider
is the poset P where K is the Borel simplicial complex on X ×ω consisting
K
of finite partial Γ-colorings. The basic disadvantage of this poset is that not
all maximal K-sets are total Γ-colorings, and there are elements of P which
K
cannot be extended to total Γ-colorings. Thus, we have to restrict the posets
P in some way to get the desired effect. This is not always straightforward,
K
and the resulting posets are usually not simplicial complex posets in the sense
of Definition 6.1.1. The most natural attempt is the following.
Definition 8.1.1. LetX beaPolishspaceandletΓ⊂[X]<ℵ0 beaBorelgraph
on a Polish space X. The Γ-coloring forcing P is the partially ordered set of
Γ
allpartialcountablefunctionsp: X →ω whichcanbeextendedtoaΓ-coloring
of the whole space X. The ordering is that of reverse inclusion.
It is immediate that the poset P , if nonempty, forces the union of the condi-
Γ
tions in the generic filter to be a total Γ-coloring with countably many colors.
However, it is not at all clear whether the poset P is Suslin, σ-closed, or bal-
Γ
anced. In an interesting large class of Borel graphs Γ, these questions have a
smooth resolution. Recall that a graph Γ on vertex set X has coloring number
κ if there is a well-ordering ≺ of X such that for each vertex x ∈ X the set
{y ∈ X: y ≺ x and y Γ x} has cardinality smaller than κ [25]. This may seem
like a very complex notion especially in the case of infinite cardinals κ, but in
factthereisasimplecharacterizationofanalyticgraphsofuncountablecoloring
number [1].
169