=== 块 51 ===

asure equivalence.
2.5 Cardinal invariants
There are several cardinal invariants of equivalence relations which are associ-
ated with the concept of virtual equivalence classes. They respect the Borel

50 CHAPTER 2. THE VIRTUAL REALM
reducibility order; therefore, they are useful as tools for nonreducibility results.
They also are conceptually useful in several places in this book.
2.5a Basic definitions
The following definition records the most natural cardinal invariants associated
with the virtual spaces.
Definition 2.5.1. Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space
X.
1. κ(E), the pinned cardinal of E, is the smallest κ (if it exists) such that
every virtual E-class has a representative on a poset of size < κ. If E is
pinned, we let κ(E)=ℵ . If κ(E) does not exist, we write κ(E)=∞;
1
2. λ(E) is the cardinality of the set of all virtual E-classes. If the virtual
E-classes form a proper class, we let λ(E)=∞;
3. λ(E,P) is the cardinality of the set of all virtual E-classes represented on
the poset P.
Note that κ(E) = ∞ just in case λ(E) = ∞; at the same time, λ(E,P) < ∞
holdsforallE,P. Therathermysteriousdemandthatκ(E)=ℵ forallpinned
1
equivalence relations E is explained by a reference to Theorem 2.6.2: there are
no nontrivial pinned names on countable posets for any analytic equivalence
relation. It turns out that the cardinals κ(E) and λ(E,P) can attain all kinds
of exotic and informative values. We will start with the two archetypal and
somewhat boring computations.
Example 2.5.2. κ(F )=c+ and λ(F )=2c.
2 2
Proof. This follows immediately from the classification of pinned names for the
Friedman–Stanley jump. Every virtual F class is represented by a subset of
2
2ω, and distinct subsets of 2ω give rise to distinct virtual F classes.
2
Example 2.5.3. κ(E ) = ∞. To see this, note that by Example 2.4.6, the
ω1
virtual E -classes are classified by ordinals, so there is a proper class of them.
ω1
Similarly,κ(HC)=∞,asbyExample2.4.7thevirtualHC-classesareclassified
by transitive sets, so there is a proper class of them.
Theorem 2.8.9 shows that in fact E is a minimal example of an equivalence
ω1
relation E with κ(E)=∞.
The most appealing fact about the cardinal invariants κ(E) and λ(E,P)
is that they respect the Borel reducibility order; therefore, they can be used
to prove Borel nonreducibility results. In a good number of instances, the
comparison of the cardinal invariants is the fastest and most intuitive way of
provingnonreducibility. Oneofthemainfeaturesofthisstyleofargumentation
is that it automatically survives the transfer to nonreducibility by functions
more complicated than Borel.