=== 块 243 ===

hypergraphGhasBorel σ-bounded chromatic number ifthereareBorel
(cid:83)
sets B ⊂ X for n ∈ ω such that X = B and for every n ∈ ω, every finite
n n n
subset of B has G-chromatic number less than n+2.
n

256 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
ItisimmediatethatcountableBorelchromaticnumberimpliesBorelσ-bounded
chromatic number. The opposite implication does not holds as the following
examples show.
Example 11.1.10. The Hamming graph H has uncountable Borel chromatic
2
number by Fact 11.1.5 but it does have Borel σ-bounded chromatic number.
To see this, observe that it contains no odd length cycles and therefore H on
2
each finite subset of 2ω has chromatic number 2. The sequence B defined by
n
B = 2ω and B = 0 for all n (cid:54)= 1 exemplifies the Borel σ-bounded chromatic
1 n
number of H .
2
Example 11.1.11. The diagonal Hamming graph H does not have Borel
<ω
σ-bounded chromatic number. To see this, by the Baire category theorem it is
(cid:81)
enough to show that any non-meager Borel subset of X = (n+1) contains
n
arbitrarily large finite H -cliques. Thus, let B ⊂X be non-meager Borel and
<ω
let m∈ω be a number. Let t be a finite string of natural numbers such that B
is comeager in t and |t| = n > m. A simple construction yields a point x ∈ X
such that t ⊂ x and for every i ∈n the point x , obtained from x by rewriting
i
its n-th entry with i, belongs to the set B. Since the set {x : i∈n}⊂B is an
i
H -clique, the argument is complete.
<ω
The class of analytic finitary hypergraphs which do not have Borel σ-bounded
chromatic number has a simple basis.
Definition 11.1.12. Let (cid:104)a ,H ,t : n ∈ ω(cid:105) be a sequence such that a is
n n n n
a nonempty finite set, H is a hypergraph on a of chromatic number > n,
n n
(cid:81) (cid:83) (cid:81)
t ∈ a , and the set {t : n ∈ ω} is dense in a . The skew
n m∈n m n n m∈n n
(cid:81)
product H ,t is then called a large skew product.
n n n
A straightforward Baire category argument as in Example 11.1.11 shows that
a large skew product does not have Borel σ-bounded chromatic number. The
following fact is proved in the same way as the G -dichotomy, and we omit the
0
standard argument.
Fact 11.1.13. Let G be a finitary analytic hypergraph on a Polish space X.
Exactly one of the following occurs:
1. G has Borel σ-bounded chromatic number;
2. there is a large skew product H on a Polish space Y and a continuous
homomorphism h: Y →X of H to G.
Many interesting natural examples of hypergraphs which do not have Borel σ-
bounded chromatic number actually have a stronger property encapsulated in
the following definitions.
Definition 11.1.14. Let a be a finite set and G be a hypergraph on a. The
fractional chromatic number of G is the maximum of all numbers Σ f(v)
v∈a
where f: a → [0,1] ranges over all functions such that Σ f(v) ≤ 1 for all
v∈b
G-anticliques b⊂a.