=== 块 11 ===

it equivalence relation F of a continuous Polish group
1
action:
1. (Corollary 9.4.8) There is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω;
2. (Corollary 9.4.11) there is a discontinuous homomorphism of R to R/Z;

1.3. INDEPENDENCE: BY TOPIC 7
3. (Corollary 9.4.22) given a Borel graph Γ on a Polish space, Γ contains a
maximal acyclic subgraph;
4. (Corollary 9.4.10) given a Borel equivalence relation E on a Polish space,
the E-quotient space can be linearly ordered;
5. (Corollary 9.4.15) given a pinned orbit equivalence relation E of a contin-
uous Polish group action, E has a transversal.
Theorem1.3.4. ThefollowingstatementsareseparatelyconsistentwithZF+DC
and |E| (cid:54)≤ |F| for any orbit equivalence relation E of a turbulent Polish group
actionandananalyticequivalencerelationF classifiablebycountablestructures:
1. (Corollary 9.3.6) Given a Polish vector space X over a countable field, X
has a basis;
2. (Corollary 9.3.7) given a Borel graph G on a Polish space, G contains a
maximal acyclic subgraph;
3. (Corollary 9.3.10) given a pinned equivalence relation G classifiable by
countable structures, G has a transversal.
There are many interesting open questions left in the area of quotient space
cardinalities. Forone,wedonotknowwhetherthevariousindependenceresults
we obtain can be in general combined in the spirit of Question 1.3.2. There are
alsomorespecificquestions. CanthecardinalitiesofcountableBorelequivalence
relations can be manipulated in the context of ZF+DC? For example, are there
countableBorelequivalencerelationsE,F suchthatbothinequalities|E|<|F|
and |F| < |E| are consistent with ZF+DC? In ZF+DC, does the existence
of a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω introduce new provable inequalities between
quotient space cardinalities?
Locally countable structures. One particularly popular subject of descrip-
tivesettheoryinthelastquarter-centuryhasbeenthestudyofcountableBorel
equivalence relations and the various structures on their equivalence classes.
Using the methods of this book, one can identify many new fracture lines in
this subject; various selection principles can be meaningfully stratified by the
ZF+DC provability of implications between them. The following is a sampling
of the results we obtain.
Theorem 1.3.5. (Corollary 11.4.17) Let G be an analytic graph on a Polish
space, with uncountable Borel chromatic number. Given a locally finite bipar-
tite Borel graph H satisfying the Marks–Unger condition, it is consistent that
ZF+DC holds, H has a perfect matching and the chromatic number of G is
uncountable.
Theorem 1.3.6. Let G be an analytic hypergraph with all hyperedges finite, on
a Polish space X, with uncountable Borel chromatic number. The following are
consistent with ZF+DC plus the statement that the chromatic number of the
hypergraph G is uncountable: