=== 块 22 ===

exoticandinformativevalues. Givenananalyticequivalence
relation E, one defines the pinned cardinal κ(E) as the minimal cardinal such
thatallvirtualclassesofE arerepresentedbynamesonposetsofsize<κ. One

18 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
also defines λ(E) as the cardinality of the virtual quotient space, and λ(E,P)
as the cardinality of the set of virtual classes which are represented by names
on the poset P. These cardinals respect the Borel reducibility order; therefore,
theyserveasviabletoolsfortheBorelnonreducibilityresults. Inaddition,they
interact well with a number of operations on equivalence relations. In a jarring
development, these cardinals can connect Borel nonreducibility results to hard
questions about singular cardinal arithmetic or similar concerns of transfinite
set theory.
Section 2.6 limits the type of partial orders that can carry a nontrivial E-
pinned name. Theorem 2.6.2 shows that, in particular, proper forcings do not
carry any nontrivial E-pinned names. Theorem 2.6.3 shows that as soon as
there are some nontrivial E-pinned names (i.e. E is not pinned), then one can
find them in any partial order collapsing ℵ . The most curious result is The-
1
orem 2.6.4: if E is Borel reducible to an orbit equivalence relation, then every
nontrivialvirtualE-classreallycomesfromacollapseofsomeuncountablecar-
dinality to ℵ . Compare this with the efforts of Section 2.4 where some virtual
0
classes of equivalence relations classifiable by countable structures were clas-
sified by uncountable structures to be collapsed down to the countable size.
This feature does not persist to arbitrary analytic equialence relations: Ex-
ample 2.6.8 produces a nontrivial E-pinned name on the Namba forcing for a
suitable equivalence relation E.
Section 2.7 proves two absoluteness results. First, in Corollary 2.7.3 we
show that for a Borel equivalence relation E, the statement “E is pinned”
is absolute among all forcing extensions. This greatly simplifies the language
used to formulate later results. A similar statement for analytic equivalence
relations requires large cardinal assumptions. Second, in Theorem 2.7.4, we
show that at least for equivalence relations E reducible to orbit equivalence
relations, transitive inner models of ZFC calculate the pinned cardinal κ(E)
predictably: theircalculationcannotreturnavaluelargerthantheactualvalue
of κ(E) in V.
It is not clear if the class of unpinned Borel equivalence relations allows a
neat basis in ZFC. The main result of Section 2.8 shows that the answer is
affirmative at least in the symmetric Solovay model. There, the basis for un-
pinned Borel equivalence relations is just {F } (a former conjecture of Kechris,
2
which nevertheless fails badly in ZFC); for unpinned analytic equivalence rela-
tions we isolate the basis {F ,E }–Corollary 2.8.13 and Theorem 2.8.11. We
2 ω1
also provide a basis for the class of analytic equivalence relations E such that
κ(E)=∞. The basis is {E }–Theorem 2.8.9.
ω1
Chapter 3 restates and greatly generalizes Hjorth’s notion of turbulence
in forcing terms. This development shows that nonturbulent equivalence re-
lations are in fact parallel to pinned equivalence relations in a very precise
sense. The forcing relation encapsulates many distracting estimates needed in
thetraditionaltreatmentofturbulence,resultinginacleanandefficientgeneral
calculus.
Section 3.1 provides the motivating insight–namely, that building pairs of