=== 块 323 ===

from the
fact that p¯⊂p , and the negation of (1) implies by the Mostowski absoluteness
i
thatx ,x arenotconnectedbyanypathinthegraphΓ∩V[H ],whichislarger
0 1 i
than p and therefore (3) has to fail.
i

340 CHAPTER 13. THE ARITY DIVIDE
The pairwise mutual genericity implies that if i,j ∈n are distinct numbers and
v ,v ⊂X arethesetsofverticesmentionedinsomeedgesinp ,p respectively,
i j i j
(cid:83)
thenv ∩v ⊂V. This,togetherwiththeclaim,meansthattheunion p can-
i j i i
not contain a cycle and so is the desired common lower bound of the conditions
p for i∈n.
i
Corollary 13.3.13. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X.
1. Write P for the poset adding a maximal acyclic subgraph of Γ as in Ex-
ample 6.4.10. In the P-extension of the symmetric Solovay model every
homomorphism between Polish groups is continuous;
2. It is consistent relative to an inaccessible cardinal that ZF+DC holds, Γ
has a maximal acyclic subgraph and every homomorphism between Polish
groups is continuous.
Example 13.3.14. Let F be a Fraiss´e class of structures in finite relational
language with strong amalgamation. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on
a Polish space X. Let P = P(F,E) be the poset of Definition 8.6.3. For each
numbern∈ω,theposetP isn,2-balancedandeverybalancedvirtualcondition
is n,2-centered.
Note that in case of the linearization poset P for the E -quotient space, as
0
isolated in Example 8.6.5, is tethered by Example 10.5.8 and does not add an
E -selector by Example 9.2.11. Therefore, P violates the conclusion of Theo-
0
rem 13.2.7, so P contains no dense analytic 3,2-centered subset.
Proof. It follows from Theorem 8.6.4 that balanced virtual conditions in P are
classified by F-structures on the virtual quotient space X∗∗. Let p¯ be such a
structure. Let V[H ] for i∈n be generic extensions of the ground model which
i
are pairwise mutually generic. Let p ∈ V[H ] be a condition extending p¯, for
i i
each i ∈ n. Note that the domains of the conditions pairwise intersect in the
(cid:83)
domain of p¯. Let b = dom(p ). For each finite set a ⊂ b use the strong
i i
amalgamation of the class F n−1-many times to find a structure N ∈ F on
a
a so that for each i∈n, N (cid:22)(dom(p )∩a)=p (cid:22)(dom(p )∩a). Let U be an
a i i i
ultrafilter on [b]<ℵ0 such that for every finite set c⊂b, the set {a∈[b]<ℵ0: c⊂
a} belongs to U. Let N be the structure on b which is the U-integral of the
structures N . It is immediate that for all N (cid:22)dom(p )=p for each i∈3, and
a i i
the closure of the class F under substructures shows that N is a F-structure.
It is the desired lower bound of the conditions p for i∈n.
i
Corollary 13.3.15. Let E be a Borel equivalence relation on a Polish space X.
1. Let P be the E-linearization poset as in Example 8.6.5. In the P-generic
extension of the symmetric Solovay model every homomorphism between
Polish groups is continuous;