=== 块 15 ===

ry. One of the most notorious versions of it is countable to
oneuniformization,thestatementthateverysubsetoftheplanewithnonempty
countableverticalsectionscontainsthegraphofatotalfunction. InChapter10,

1.4. INDEPENDENCE: BY MODEL 11
greatlyimprovingthemethodsandresultsof[56],wedevelopasatisfactorycri-
terionwhichguaranteesthatvariousstronguniformizationprinciples(including
thecountable-to-oneuniformizationasthehumblestspecialcase)holdinnearly
all models under study. Separating the various uniformization principles seems
to be a difficult task beyond the techniques of the present book.
Limitations of the method. The balanced forcing offers a very flexible and
powerfulmethodforobtainingindependenceresultsinZF+DCsettheory. How-
ever, certain desirable types of independence results are outside of its reach.
Certain basic limitations are encapsulated in the following theorems.
Theorem 1.3.18. (Corollary 9.1.2) In every balanced extension of the sym-
metric Solovay model, there is no ω sequence of distinct Borel sets of bounded
1
Borel rank.
Theorem 1.3.19. (Theorem 14.3.1) In every nontrivial balanced extension of
the symmetric Solovay model, there is a set of reals without the Baire property.
Theorem 1.3.20. (Theorem 14.1.1) In every balanced extension of the sym-
metric Solovay model, there is no maximal almost disjoint family of subsets of
ω.
Theorem 1.3.21. (Theorem 14.2.1 simplified) In every balanced extension of
the symmetric Solovay model, there is no linearly ordered, unbounded set of
elements of ωω in the modulo finite domination ordering.
Thus, thebalancedforcingcannotbeusedtoproveforexampletheconsistency
with ZF+DC of the statement that ℵ ≤ |E | but ℵ (cid:54)≤ |E |. For consistency
1 1 1 0
results of this type, one has to reach to the weakly balanced forcing of Sec-
tion 5.3. Another apparently difficult question which cannot be resolved using
balanced forcing is the consistency of ZF+DC plus the statement that there is
a non-Lebesgue measurable set of reals, every uncountable set of reals contains
a perfect subset, and every set of reals has the Baire property [81]. A similar
interesting question unresolvable by the balanced forcing technique was asked
by Marks and Unger: is it consistent with ZF+DC that every set of reals has
the Baire property and every countable Borel equivalence relation is an orbit
equivalence relation of a (discontinuous) action of Z?
1.4 Independence: by model
One appealing way to present the work in this book is to consider several more
orlesscanonicalgenericextensionsoftheSolovaymodelandlistthestatements
that we know hold in them. There are also test problems that we do not
know how to resolve. The reader needs to keep in mind that all the models
are balanced extensions of the Solovay model W and as such obey the general
limitationsdescribedattheendoftheprevioussection. Thelistbelowincludes
only models that we find of immediate interest for an introduction; there are
innumerable other options.