=== 块 29 ===

h with finite hyperedges, with uncountable Borel
chromatic number. Given a countable Borel equivalence relation E, we prove
the consistency of ZF+DC plus “E is an orbit equivalence of a Z-action” plus

1.6. NAVIGATION 25
“thechromaticnumberofGisuncountable”–Corollary11.4.10. Givenalocally
finite acyclic Borel graph H, we prove the consistency of ZF+DC plus “the
chromatic number of H is not greater than three” plus “the chromatic number
of G is uncountable”–Corollary 11.4.12.
Section 11.5 deals with the effects of coloring a larger, perhaps not locally
countable, Borel graphs G on locally countable structures. If the graph G does
not contain injective homomorphic copies of the bipartite graphs K→ and
ω,ω
K for some n ∈ ω, then the canonical forcing for adding a G-coloring with
n,ω1
countably many colors does not add an E -transversal (Theorem 11.5.6). If the
0
graph G contains no injective homomorphic copy of K , then the canonical
n,n
coloringposetdoesnotaddacoloringofthediagonalHamminggraphH with
<ω
countably many colors (Theorem 11.5.8). Great examples of such graphs come
from the Euclidean distance graphs considered at length by Erd˝os, Hajnal, and
Komj´ath among others. Let D be a Borel set of positive reals, and let G be the
graph on R2 connecting points whose Euclidean distance belongs to the set D.
The nature of the set D greatly influences the behavior of the graph. If D is a
sequenceconvergingtozero,thenthegraphGfallsintothefirstcategoryabove,
and so in ZF+DC the chromatic number of G can be equal to ℵ without the
0
existence of an E -transversal. If the set D is algebraically independent, then
0
the graph G falls into the second category and so its chromatic number can be
equal to ℵ without providing even a coloring to H . On the other hand, if
0 <ω
the set D contains a dense subgroup of Q, then the existence of a G-coloring
with countably many colors easily implies the existence of an E -transversal.
0
Section 11.6 studies the effects of collapses of various Borel cardinals to |2ω|
ortoE onlocallyfinitestructures. Perhapssomewhatunexpectedly,collapsing
0
aBorelcardinalsuchasE to2ω doesnotyieldanE -transversal; similarly, for
0 0
manylocallycountablehypergraphsG,itdoesnotmakeGhavecountablechro-
matic number. The notion of the fractional chromatic number of a hypergraph
(Definition 11.1.18) makes a key apperance in the main result–Theorem 11.6.1.
AcollapseofaBorelcardinaltoE hasnodiscernibleeffectonlocallycountable
0
structures, as Theorem 11.6.5 shows.
Section 11.7 revisits the class of compactly balanced forcing. We show that
for many locally countable hypergraphs G, compactly balanced forcings do not
make G have countable chromatic number. such forcings do not add countable
coloring to a number of locally countable hypergraphs. The notion of Borel
σ-finitechromaticnumber(Definition11.1.9)iscriticalhere;thediagonalHam-
ming graph H is the most prominent example. In particular, it is consistent
<ω
with ZF+DC that there be a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω, yet the chromatic
number of H is uncountable.
<ω
Chapter 12 presents important two classes of posets which are in a precise
sense dual to each other. Both of them offer extensive control over uncountable
subsets of Polish spaces, but they approach the task from exactly orthogonal
directions.
Section 12.1 isolates the classes of perfectly balanced and perfect forcings.
Themaininhabitantoftheseclassesistheorderingofinfinitesubsetsofnatural