=== 块 138 ===

lassified by bases of X over the field.
Oneimportantpointofthepresentsectionisthatthereareinterestingmatroids
modular in the sense of Definition 6.4.1 even though their pre-geometries are
not modular.

6.4. MODULAR COMPLEXES 145
Example6.4.10. (Agraphicmatroid)LetGbeaBorelgraphonaPolishspace
X. Let K be the simplicial complex on G consisting of finite acyclic subsets of
G. Then K is modular. Every maximal K-set is strongly maximal.
Proof. Consider the (non-Polishable) group Y of finite subsets of X with the
symmetric difference operation, viewed as a vector space over the binary field.
The simplicial complex L of linearly independent finite subsets of Y is modular
byExample6.4.8. ItiseasytoseethatKisjusttherestrictionofLtoG,where
every edge of G is viewed as a two-element subset of X. The modular function
for L restricted to L witnesses the modularity of K.
ToshowthateverymaximalK-setisstronglymaximal,letA⊂X beamax-
imal K-set and let B ⊂K be a set. Let M be a countable elementary submodel
of a large structure containing B and A. If the third option of Definition 6.4.2
fails for B, there must be a set b ∈ B such that (M ∩A)∪b is a K-set. If
b ∈ M then b ⊂ A by the maximality of A and the elementarity of the model
M and the second option of Definition 6.4.2 holds. Suppose then that b ∈/ M.
By the elementarity of the model M, there must be a set a∈B∩M such that
b∩M ⊂ a. We claim that a∪b ∈ K, confirming the first option of Defini-
tion 6.4.2. Suppose towards a contradiction that this fails, and let c⊂a∪b be
a cycle. The cycle has to contain some edges in b\M; let c(cid:48) ⊂c be a maximal
contiguous part of c containing only edges in b\M. The beginning and ending
vertex of c(cid:48) (denoted by v ,v respectively) must belong to M. Thus, v ,v are
0 1 0 1
connected by a G-path, they are also connected by A-path by the maximality
ofA,andsuchapathd⊂AmustbefoundinthemodelM bytheelementarity
of M. Then d∪c(cid:48) is a cycle in (M ∩A)∪b, contradicting the choice of the set
b.
Example 6.4.11. (Atransversalmatroid)LetX beaPolishspacepartitioned
into Borel sets B ,B , and let G be a Borel bipartite graph between B and
0 1 0
B . Let K be the matroid on G consisting of finite sets of edges in which no
1
two distinct edges share a vertex. Then K is modular. If every vertex in X has
uncountable degree, then a K-set A⊂G is maximal if and only if it is a perfect
matching.
Proof. To exhibit the modular function, let f(a) = {x ∈ X: there is an edge
e∈asuchthatxisoneofthetwoverticesofe}. Nowsupposethateveryvertex
in X has uncountable degree and proceed towards the classification of strongly
maximal sets. Let A⊂X be any K-set.
First, assume that A is strongly maximal. To see that A has to be a perfect
matching, for every vertex x ∈ X consider the set B = {{e}: x is one of the
x
vertices in e}. Consider the alternatives of Definition 6.4.2 for B . (1) fails and
x
(3)isimpossibleasthevertexxhasuncountabledegreeinG; therefore, (2)has
to hold, meaning that the set A contains an edge with the vertex x on it and so
A is a perfect matching.
Second, suppose that A is a perfect matching and B ⊂K is a Borel set. To
verify Definition 6.4.2 for A,B, let M be a countable elementary submodel of a
large structure containing G,A,B. If the third option of Definition 6.4.2 fails,