=== 块 130 ===

membership of a in K can be detected by checking
all fragments of a in the components of Γ which are countable. The balanced
pairsareclassifiedbymaximalK-setswhicharepreciselytheperfectmatchings
of Γ.

6.3. COMPLEXES OF BOREL COLORING NUMBER ℵ 137
1
For the following example, recall the notion of an end of an infinite connected
graph[36]. Ifthegraphinquestionisinadditionacyclic,anendcanbeidentified
with an orientation of the graph in which every vertex gets exactly one edge
flowing out of it.
Example 6.2.5. Let Γ be a locally finite acyclic Borel graph on a Polish space
X with all components infinite; view Γ as a symmetric subset of X2. Let K be
the simplicial complex of all finite subsets a⊂Γ consisting of finite sets a such
thatforeachΓ-path-connectednessclassc⊂X theseta∩c2 canbeextendedto
an end. It is immediate that K is a Borel locally countable simplicial complex.
ThebalancedconditionsareclassifiedbymaximalK-sets,whichareorientations
of the graph Γ in which every vertex has exactly one point in its outflow.
Example 6.2.6. Let Γ be a locally countable Borel graph on a Polish space X
ofchromaticnumber≤nforsomefiniten∈ω. LetKbethesimplicialcomplex
of all finite partial Γ-colorings by at most n colors which can be completed to
a total coloring by at most n colors. Then K is a locally countable simplicial
complex: givenafinitecoloringa,themembershipofainK canbedetectedby
checking all fragments of a in the components of Γ which are countable. The
balanced pairs are classified by maximal K-sets which are precisely the total
Γ-colorings.
6.3 Complexes of Borel coloring number ℵ
1
Thenextclassofexamplesisobtainedasageneralizationofthelocallycountable
simplicialcomplexusingadefinableversionofaconceptduetoErd˝osandHajnal
[25].
Definition 6.3.1. 1. Let Γ be a Borel graph on a Polish space X. We say
that the graph has Borel coloring number ℵ if there is a Borel directed
1
graph(cid:126)Γ (an orientation of Γ) such that for each edge {x ,x }∈Γ, either
0 1
(cid:104)x ,x (cid:105)∈(cid:126)Γor(cid:104)x ,x (cid:105)∈(cid:126)Γ, andthe(cid:126)Γ-outflowofeachpointiscountable.
0 1 1 0
2. Let K be a Borel simplicial complex on a Polish space X. We say that K
has Borel coloring number ℵ if the graph Γ has Borel coloring number
1 K
ℵ .
1
Inparticular,everylocallycountableBorelsimplicialcomplexhasBorelcoloring
numberℵ . AMostowskiabsolutenessargumentshowsthatifaBorelgraphhas
1
Borelcoloringnumberℵ thenthisfeaturewillpersisttoallgenericextensions.
1
To prove the balance for the posets associated with Borel simplicial com-
plexes of Borel coloring number ℵ and to classify the balanced conditions, we
1
need a technical weakening of maximality.
Definition 6.3.2. Let K be a Borel simplicial complex on a Polish space X.
A K-set A⊂X is weakly maximal if for every point x∈X either x∈A or for
every countable set b⊂X there is c∈K disjoint from b such that (A∩b)∪c is
a K-set, but (A∩b)∪c∪{x} is not.