=== 块 31 ===

nder discussion is Theorem 13.2.1 which shows that
n+1,n-balanced forcings do not add discontinuous homomorphisms between
Polish groups. This means that in particular no nonprincipal ultrafilters on ω

1.7. NOTATION AND TERMINOLOGY 27
are added. A similar effect is produced by Theorem 13.2.3: n+1,n-balanced
forcings do not add non-Borel homomorphisms between various Borel quotient
groups studied in particular by Ilijas Farah [28]. The evaluation of arity comes
into view with Theorem 13.2.4: it turns out that m,n-balanced forcings add
no colorings of Polish groups which avoid monochromatic solutions to suitable
equations, and the numbers m,n reflect the complexity of the equation. We
alsostudytherelatedandmuchmorerestrictiveclassofm,n-centeredforcings.
A particular success is Theorem 13.2.7 showing that 3,2-centered forcings do
not add linear orderings of Borel quotient spaces except for a trivial reason.
Section 13.3 provides a long list of examples and corollaries with particular
emphasis on illustrating the differences between the forcing classes introduced
in this chapter.
Chapter 14 contains results that for some reason do not fit into the pre-
vious chapters; some of our favorite theorems are here. Certain structures are
impossibletoaddbybalancedforcing; MADfamilies(Theorem14.1.1)andlin-
early ordered unbounded subsets of many partial orderings (Theorem 14.2.1)
fall into this category.
In Section 14.3, we prove one of the main constraints on the (nontrivial)
balanced extensions of the Solovay model: there must be a set of reals in them
which does not have the Baire property (Theorem 14.3.1). On the other hand,
onedoesobtaincertainmodelsinwhicheverysetofrealisLebesguemeasurable
as per Theorem 14.3.4. An old result of Shelah concerning the consistency of
ZF+DCpluseverysetofrealsisLebesguemeasurableplusthereisasetofreals
withouttheBairepropertycanbepresentedusingthistheorem–Example14.3.5.
In Section 14.4 we treat the very soft class of posets which possess defin-
able balanced conditions. While at first sight it may seem that this class con-
tains no particularly interesting posets, this is not the case: for example, the
posets adding a discontinuous automorphism of P(ω) modulo finite or a count-
able complete section to a given pinned Borel equivalence relation belong to
it. We show that these posets preserve uncountable chromatic numbers of an-
alytic hypergraphs (Theorem 14.4.7) and do not introduce inequalities of the
form |E | ≤ |E| where E is a pinned orbit equivalence relation. Many other
1
preservation properties of posets in this class remain unstated.
1.7 Notation and terminology
General. Inthisbook,asinmanybooksonsettheory,itisafrequentlyplayed
gambitintheproofstotakeanelementarysubmodelofa“largestructure”. The
structure itself is rarely relevant. As a metadefinition, by a “large structure”
we always mean the structure (cid:104)H ,∈(cid:105) where H is the set of all sets whose
<κ <κ
transitive closure has cardinality < κ, and κ is the smallest regular cardinal
such that H contains all objects named in the proof to that point, and also
<κ
their powersets. Similarly, the phrase “a large fragment of ZFC” occurs in
several places in the book. It is never truly informative to analyze precisely