=== 块 5 ===

14.5 F structurability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 352
2
14.6 The Ramsey ultrafilter extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355
Bibliography 361
Index 368

x CONTENTS

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Outline of the subject
Geometric set theory is the research direction which studies transitive models
of set theory with respect to their extensional agreement. It turns out that
numerousexistingconceptsindescriptivesettheoryandanalysishaveintuitive
andinformativegeometricrestatements,andthegeometricpointofviewmakes
it possible to readily isolate many new concepts and generalize old ones. Sur-
prising parallels appear between areas that to date did not have a discernible
interface.
TheoldestpartofthesubjectdealswithBorelequivalencerelationsonPolish
spaces. Here,givenanequivalenceE onaspaceX andaconfiguration{M : i∈
i
I} of transitive models of set theory, one asks whether it is possible for an E-
equivalenceclasstohaverepresentativesinsomemodelsoftheconfigurationand
fail to be represented in others. The answer to this question greatly varies with
the nature of the equivalence relation and the configuration in question, and
the resulting differences can be used with great effect to prove non-reducibility
and ergodicity theorems for various Borel equivalence relations. One notable
successinthisareaisareformulationofHjorth’sturbulenceingeometricterms,
which is much more practicable than the original definition and allows endless
generalizations and variations entirely divorced from the original context of
Polish group actions.
Geometric set theory really started to blossom after it was applied in a
seemingly entirely different direction: the independence results in choiceless
Zermelo–Fraenkel (ZF) set theory. This is an area which saw a surge of re-
sults in early 1970’s after which the interest in it waned. Both our purpose
and methodology are quite different from the early practitioners though. We
study almost exclusively ZF independence results between Σ2 consequences of
1
the Axiom of Choice which are intimately connected to various contemporary
concerns of descriptive set theory and analysis. A very detailed structure ap-
pears, with some fracture lines running in parallel to existing combinatorial,
1