=== 块 128 ===

t be the case
k k
that (a ∪b)∩[x ] ∈/ K. Thus, considering the proper subset a(cid:48) =a ∩[x ] ,
k 0 F k k 0 F
we get b∪a(cid:48) ∈/ K, contradicting the assumption that (cid:104)b,a (cid:105)∈Γ.
k k

6.2. LOCALLY COUNTABLE COMPLEXES 135
To conclude this section, we mention two operations on simplicial complexes.
Both of them may seem trivial from the simplicial complex view, but they
generate quite unpredictable operations on the associated posets P . Several
K
classes of complexes introduced below are nearly trivially closed under these
operations.
Definition 6.1.5. Let K be a Borel simplicial complex on a Polish space X,
and let B ⊂X be a Borel set. The restriction K(cid:22)B is just the set K∩[B]<ℵ0.
Definition 6.1.6. Let X be a Polish space and for each n ∈ ω, let K be a
n
(cid:86)
BorelcomplexonaBorelsetB ⊂X. TheproductK= K isthesimplicial
n n n
complex of all finite sets a⊂X such that ∀n a∩B ∈K .
n n
One way to use the latter operation appears is when the Borel sets B for
n
n ∈ ω are pairwise disjoint. In this case, the poset P corresponds to the
K
countable support product of the posets P for n ∈ ω. However, if the Borel
Kn
setsB overlap,theforcingeffectsofthisoperationbecomemuchmoredifficult
n
to analyze.
6.2 Locally countable complexes
In this section, we discuss the simples class of simplicial complexes to handle.
Definition 6.2.1. Let K be a Borel simplicial complex on a Polish space X.
We say that K is locally countable if the graph Γ is locally countable.
K
It follows from a routine application of the Lusin–Novikov theorem that if a
BorelsimplicialcomplexKonaPolishspaceX islocallycountable,thenE isa
K
countableBorelequivalencerelation. Inparticular,aBorelsimplicialcomplexK
islocallycountableifandonlyifthereisacountableBorelequivalencerelationE
onX suchthatforeveryfiniteseta⊂X,a∈Kifandonlyifa∩c∈Kforevery
E-class c. The classification of balanced pairs in the case of locally countable
simplicialcomplexesisparticularlysimple: theycorrespondtomaximalK-sets.
This is the content of the following theorem:
Theorem 6.2.2. Let K be a locally countable Borel simplicial complex on a
Polish space X.
1. For every maximal K-set A ⊂ X, the pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,X),Aˇ(cid:105) is balanced in
the poset P =P ;
K
2. for every balanced pair (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105), there is a maximal K-set A⊂X such that
the balanced pairs (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) and (cid:104)Coll(ω,X),Aˇ(cid:105) are equivalent;
3. distinct maximal K-sets yield inequivalent balanced pairs.
In particular, the poset P is balanced.