=== 块 167 ===

∈J andfindaΓ-coloring
c: X → ω such that p ⊂ c and all points not in dom(p) get a c-color from the
set a. Clearly, Coll(ω,X) (cid:13) cˇ≤ pˇ and so c is the desired balanced condition
stronger than p.

176 CHAPTER 8. OTHER FORCINGS
Example 8.1.15. Ceder [17] provided a countable subfield Φ of the complex
plane C such that any 3-Hamel decomposition of the complex plane over Φ
consists of pieces which contain no equilateral triangles.
A very similar poset can produce a decomposition of a vector space into count-
ably many internally linearly independent sets.
Definition 8.1.16. Let X be a Borel vector space over a countable field Φ.
The Hamel hypergraph is the set Γ ⊂ [X]<ℵ0 consisting of linearly dependent
finite sets of nonzero elements of X. A Γ-coloring c: X →ω is called an Hamel
decomposition.
Proposition 8.1.17. Let X be an uncountable Borel vector space over a count-
able field Φ. Then there is a Hamel decomposition of X if and only if the
Continuum Hypothesis holds.
Proof. Assume first that the Continuum Hypothesis holds. Exhaust X by an
(cid:83)
inclusion increasing sequence of countable subspaces, X = X . Let
(cid:83)
α∈ω1 α
c: X → ω be a map which is an injection on each set X \ X . We
α β∈α β
claim that c is a Hamel decomposition. Indeed, suppose that a ⊂ X is a finite
linearlydependentset. Fixalinearcombinationofelementsofaaddingupto0.
(cid:83)
Letα∈ω bethelargestordinalsuchthatthesetX \ X containssome
1 α β∈α β
element of a with a nonzero coefficient in the linear combination. This element
cannot be unique, since then it would be expressible as a linear combination of
(cid:83)
the subspace X , an impossibility. So a contains at least two elements in
β∈α β
(cid:83)
the set X \ X ; thus, a cannot be monochromatic, as c is injective on
α β∈α β
this set.
On the other hand, suppose that the Continuum Hypothesis does not hold,
and let c: X → ω is a map; we must produce a nontrivial monochromatic
linear combination adding up to zero. Let M be an elementary submodel of
cardinality ℵ of a large structure, containing the map c. Use the failure of
1
the Continuum Hypothesis to produce a point x ∈ X \M. Use a counting
0
argument to find distinct points y ,y ∈X∩M and a number n∈ω such that
0 1
c(x −y ) = c(x −y ) = n. Use the elementarity of the model M to find
0 0 0 1
a point x ∈ X ∩M such that c(x −y ) = c(x −y ) = n. Note that the
1 1 0 1 1
points z = x −y ,z = x −y and z = x −y ,z = x −y are pairwise
0 0 0 1 0 1 2 1 0 3 1 1
distinct, they attain the same color n, and z −z −z +z = 0. The proof is
0 1 2 3
complete.
Definition8.1.18. LetX beaBorelvectorspaceoveracountablefieldΦ. The
Hameldecompositionforcing P isthesetofallfunctionspsuchthatdom(p)isa
countablesubspaceofX,rng(p)⊂ω,andpisaΓ-coloringondom(p)whereΓis
theHamelhypergraph. Theorderingisdefinedbyq ≤pifp⊂q,andthereisno
nontriviallinearcombinationofaq-monochromaticsetelementsofdom(q)with
result in dom(p), and for every dom(p)-coset e⊂dom(q) distinct from dom(p),
theset{n∈ω: thereexistsalinearcombinationofaq-monochromaticsetwith
(cid:83)
result in φ·e} belongs to the ideal J.
φ∈Φ