=== 块 163 ===

econtainingallrelevantinformation. Inthemodel
N, there are filters {g : i∈ω} on the poset R ∩M which are mutually generic
i 0
over the model M. By a mutual genericity argument applied in M, the points

172 CHAPTER 8. OTHER FORCINGS
x =η /g ∈X are pairwise distinct elements of N. Now, let h⊂R ∩M be a
i 0 i 1
filter generic over the model N containing the condition r and let y =η /h∈
1 1
X\N. By the forcing theorem in M, it is the case that M[G ,h]|={x ,y}∈Γ
i i
for each i ∈ ω. By the Mostowski absoluteness for the models M[g ,h], it is
i
in fact the case that y is Γ-connected with each x for i ∈ ω. This, however,
i
contradicts Claim 8.1.3 applied to N.
Now, for item (1) of the theorem, let c: X →Γ be a total Γ-coloring. Note
that Coll(ω,X)(cid:13)cˇ∈P by Claim 8.1.6(1). To see that the pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,X),cˇ(cid:105)
isbalanced,supposethatR ,R areposetsandσ ,σ areR -andR -namesfor
0 1 0 1 0 1
elementsofP extendingc;wemustshowthattheproductR ×R forcesσ ,σ
0 1 0 1
to be compatible in P; in other words, σ ∪σ is a function and a Γ-coloring.
0 1
Toverifythatσ ∪σ isafunction,usetheproductforcingtheoremtoconclude
0 1
that dom(σ )∩dom(σ ) is forced to be a subset of the ground model, and both
0 1
σ (cid:22)V andσ (cid:22)V areforcedtobeequaltocˇ. Toseethatσ ∪σ isaΓ-coloring,
0 1 0 1
use Claim 8.1.3(2). This completes the proof of (1).
To argue for item (2), suppose that (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) is a balanced pair. Strengthening
τ if necessary we may assume that Q (cid:13) X ∩ V ∈ dom(p). By a balance
argument, for each x ∈ X there must be a specific number c(x) ∈ ω such that
Q(cid:13)τ(xˇ)=c(x). It is not difficult to check that c: X →ω is a total Γ-coloring
and Q×Coll(ω,X)(cid:13)τ ≤cˇ. (2) then follows from Proposition 5.2.4.
(3) is immediate. The last sentence now easily follows: if p ∈ P is a
Γ
condition then by the definition of P it can be extended to a total Γ-coloring
Γ
c: X →ω which then yields a balanced virtual condition below p by (1).
Example 8.1.7. Let n ≤ 3 be a number, let D ⊂ R be a countable set of
positive reals converging to 0, and let Γ be the graph connecting two points
Dn
of Rn if their distance belongs to D. The graph Γ has countable coloring
Dn
number by [58, Theorem 7], and therefore the poset P is balanced.
ΓDn
Example 8.1.8. Let D ⊂ R be a countable set of positive reals and consider
the graph Γ connecting two points of the plane if their distance belongs to D.
D
The graph Γ does not contain 2 times uncountable as a subgraph; by [25] it
D
must have countable coloring number and so the poset P is balanced. If D is
ΓD
the set of all positive rationals then the graph contains infinite cliques and so
its chromatic number is infinite. If D is an algebraically independent set, then
it is not known whether the chromatic number is finite or infinite, and Bukh
[14] conjectured the former.
Chromatic numbers of hypergraphs offer additional challenges. We provide
elegant coloring posets for two natural classes of hypergraphs. They are less
canonical than the rest of the posets in this book as they need a choice of an
auxiliary tool: a Borel ideal J on ω containing all finite sets and such that J
is not generated by a countable subset of J. There are many such ideals, one
possible choice is the summable ideal.
Definition 8.1.9. Let X be a Borel abelian group. Let Φ be a countable field
whose multiplicative group acts on X in a Borel way, making X into a vector