=== 块 265 ===

t product of the posets K for
i
(cid:81)
i ∈ ω. Therefore, by Theorem 11.4.5, in the P -extension of the Solovay
i KiLi
model, theuncountablechromaticnumbersoffinitaryanalytichypergraphsare
preserved.

278 CHAPTER 11. LOCALLY COUNTABLE STRUCTURES
11.4b Suslin σ-linked complexes
Infairlycommonsituations,onewishestopreserveuncountablechromaticnum-
bers of analytic graphs while a task of higher arity is performed. This can be
handled by Suslin σ-linked complexes as explained in the following theorem.
Theorem 11.4.13. Let (cid:104)K,L(cid:105) be a locally countable pair. Suppose that the
simplicial complex K is Suslin σ-linked. Let G be an analytic graph with un-
countable Borel chromatic number. In the P -extension of the Solovay model,
KL
the chromatic number of G is uncountable.
The verification of the Suslin σ-linked property of Borel simplicial complexes is
invariably achieved via the following result.
Theorem 11.4.14. Let K be a locally countable Borel simplicial complex on
a Polish space X and write E = E . Suppose that there is a Borel support
K
function supp: K→[X]<ℵ0 such that
1. supp(a)⊂[a] ;
E
2. whenever a ,a are sets in K, subsets of the same E-class with disjoint
0 1
supports, then a ∪a ∈K.
0 1
Then K is Borel σ-linked.
The proofs of Theorems 11.4.13 and 11.4.14 are nearly identical to the proofs
of Theorem 11.4.5 and 11.4.6, and we omit them.
Our first example is motivated by a result of Marks and Unger [68] which
foundperfectmatchingswiththeBairepropertyinmanyBorelbipartitegraphs.
In order to do this, they isolated the following strengthening of the well-known
Hall’s condition of [38]:
Definition 11.4.15. Let Γ be a locally finite bipartite Borel graph on a Polish
space X. We say that Γ satisfies the Marks–Unger condition if there is a real
numberε>0suchthatforeveryfiniteseta⊂X ononesideofthebipartition,
the number of Γ-neighbors of a is at least (1+ε)|a|.
Example 11.4.16. Let G be a locally finite bipartite Borel graph on a Polish
spaceX satisfyingtheMarks–Ungercondition. LetKbethesimplicialcomplex
ontheedgesofGconsistingofallsetsb⊂Gwhichcanbecompletedtoaperfect
matching of G. Then K is Suslin σ-linked.
Proof. Let ε>0 be a real number witnessing the Marks–Unger property of the
graphG. LetE =E betheG-pathequivalencerelationonX. Leta∈K bea
K
set which is a subset of a single E-class; we must calculate the support supp(a)
such that the assumptions of Theorem 11.4.14 are satisfied.
Let supp(a) be the set of all G-edges which are within G-distance at most
8|a|/ε from some edge in a. We must verify the amalgamation condition, i.e. if
a,b∈KaredisjointfinitesetsinthesameE-classsuchthatsupp(a)∩supp(b)=
0,thena∪b∈K. ByHall’smarriagetheorem[38],itisenoughtoverifythatthe