=== 块 168 ===

)with
result in dom(p), and for every dom(p)-coset e⊂dom(q) distinct from dom(p),
theset{n∈ω: thereexistsalinearcombinationofaq-monochromaticsetwith
(cid:83)
result in φ·e} belongs to the ideal J.
φ∈Φ

8.2. DISCONTINUOUS HOMOMORPHISMS 177
It is not difficult to see that P is a σ-closed Suslin poset. We now classify its
balanced conditions.
Theorem 8.1.19. Let X be a Borel vector space over a countable field Φ. Let
Γ be the Hamel hypergraph and let P be the Hamel decomposition forcing.
1. If c: X →ω is a Γ-coloring, the pair (cid:104)Coll(ω,X),cˇ(cid:105) is balanced;
2. if (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) is a balanced pair, then there is a Γ-coloring c: X →ω such that
the balanced pairs (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) and (cid:104)Coll(ω,X),cˇ(cid:105) are equivalent;
3. distinct Γ-colorings yield inequivalent balanced pairs.
In particular, the Continuum Hypothesis is equivalent to the statement that P
is balanced.
As the proof of Theorem 8.1.19 is nearly literally the same as the one for The-
orem 8.1.12, we dare to leave it to the patient reader.
Example 8.1.20. Let X be the (non-Polishable) group of finite subsets of an
uncountable Polish space X with the symmetric difference operation. View X
asavectorspaceoverthebinaryfield. Letc: X →ω beaHameldecomposition
of X. The restriction c(cid:22)[Y]2 →ω is a decomposition of the clique graph on Y
into countably many sets with no monochromatic cycle.
8.2 Discontinuous homomorphisms
Another task which can be handled by balanced posets derived from simplicial
complexes is the adding of discontinuous homomorphisms between topological
structures. In this section, we treat the case of Polish groups. The problem
of the existence of discontinuous homomorphisms from one Polish group to an-
other has been studied for decades. In ZFC, some groups such as the unitary
group [95] or the group of homeomorphisms of the unit circle [77] cannot be
homomorphically mapped to another Polish group in a discontinuous way. In
a ZF+DC context, existence of discontinuous homomorphisms has interesting
consequences: ingeneral,itimpliesthatthechromaticnumberoftheHamming
graphH is2[76],forsomespecificgroupsitimpliestheexistenceofanonprin-
2
cipal ultrafilter [90, Theorem 4.1]. For an exposition, see [75]. In this section,
we provide a balanced forcing adding a discontinuous homomorphism of Polish
groups in a certain common special case.
Definition 8.2.1. Let Γ and ∆ be Polish groups. The simplicial complex
K(Γ,∆) on X × Y consists of all finite sets a ⊂ X × Y which are subsets
of a homomorphism from X to Y. We will write P(Γ,∆) for the associated
Γ,∆-homomorphism poset of countable K(Γ,∆)-sets ordered by inclusion.
As it was the case in Section 8.1, it seems to be difficult to evaluate the com-
plexity of the complex K(Γ,∆) without having additional information on the
nature of the two groups. In this section, we will deal with a very special case
which nevertheless resolves some interesting problems.