=== 块 24 ===

a-
1
lence relation and C is a virtual E-class represented in each model V , then it
n
is represented in V –Theorem 4.3.6. This typically fails for E . The topic is
ω 1
revisited in Section 9.4 below.

20 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Chapter 5 develops the basic general theory of balanced Suslin forcing.
The treatment of Suslin forcing is quite different from that in [7] or similar
treatmentsonthestructureoftherealline. Ourpartialordersaretypically(but
not necessarily) σ-closed, and serve to add combinatorial objects by explicit
countable approximations in the context of the symmetric Solovay model. It
is important to understand that the study of these partial orders takes place
exclusively within set theory with choice.
Section 5.1 defines the notion of a virtual condition in a Suslin forcing P. A
virtualconditionisanelementofthecompletionoftheposetP whichonlyexists
in some generic extension, but for which one can develop a sensible calculus of
comparisonalreadyinthegroundmodel,quiteinparalleltovirtualequivalence
classes developed in Chapter 2. There are natural equivalence and ordering
relations on virtual conditions in P.
Section 5.2 defines the key notion of a balanced pair in a Suslin forcing P.
This is a pair (cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105) where Q is a poset and τ is a Q-name for an element
of the forcing P which satisfies a natural amalgamation property in mutually
generic extensions. There is a natural notion of equivalence on balanced pairs
in P. The motherload feature exploited throughout the rest of the book is
the simple Theorem 5.2.5: every balanced class contains exactly one virtual
condition. The task of understanding a given Suslin forcing P in the context
of geometric set theory is then nearly identical to the classification of balanced
virtual conditions in a given Suslin forcing P. Balanced virtual conditions in
balancedSuslinforcingarequiteparalleltomasterconditionsinproperforcing.
Section5.3definesweaklybalancedSuslinforcing. Thisisaweakeningofthe
notionofbalancedSuslinforcingdesignedtoproducesomeeffects(suchasMAD
families) which are absent from balanced extensions of the symmetric Solovay
model. The whole development is quite parallel to balanced Suslin forcing with
suitablequantificationadjustments. Someexamplesofweaklybalancedforcings
can be found in Section 8.9. This book’s primary focus is on balanced forcing,
and the potential of the weakly balanced variations is left wide open.
Chapter 6analyzesaclassofbalancedforcingsarisingfromsimplicialcom-
plexes of various algebraic forms. Namely, let K be a Borel simplicial complex
on a Polish space X. Let P be the poset of countable subsets p ⊂ X such
K
that [p]<ℵ0 ⊂K, ordered by reverse inclusion. Many useful posets in this book
arise in this fashion, and the balance properties of the posets depend on model
theoretic properties of K. By coincidence or not, most natural examples are
matroids. Section ?? introduces the notion of a modular simplicial complex
(Definition 6.4.1), parallel to a modular matroid, with a number of examples
andrelatednotions. Anotherresult(Theorem6.5.2)showsthattheposetadding
a basis for a matroid is balanced as soon as the matroid satisfies a natural and
common complexity requirement. Section 6.6 investigates simplicial complexes
on quotient spaces, and shows that balanced conditions are naturally found
in the related virtual quotient spaces. Particularly interesting cases concern
the collapse of one quotient cardinality to another, Definition 6.6.2, and the
transversal type posets which to each pair E ⊂F of Borel equivalence relations