=== 块 59 ===

em. Thefollowingexamples,all
Borel reducible to F , are connected with combinatorics of small uncountable
2
cardinals via the pinned cardinal, even though the connection is not at first
sight obvious.

58 CHAPTER 2. THE VIRTUAL REALM
Definition 2.5.26. A hypergraph on a set X is a subset of X≤ω. If G is a
hypergraph on X, a G-anticlique is a set A ⊂ X such that A≤ω ∩G = 0. If
G is an analytic hypergraph on a Polish space X, write E for the equivalence
G
relation on Xω connecting y,z if the sets rng(y),rng(z) either both fail to be
G-anticliques or they are equal.
It is clear that the equivalence relations of the form E are all analytic and
G
almostBorelreducibletoF . InthecommoncasewhenG isBorelandcontains
2
only finite edges, the equivalence relation is in fact Borel. The following propo-
sition provides a simple combinatorial characterization of the pinned cardinal
of equivalence relations of this form.
Proposition 2.5.27. Let G be an analytic hypergraph on a Polish space X.
Then κ(E ) is equal to the larger of ℵ and the minimal cardinal κ such that
G 1
there is no G-anticlique of size κ.
Proof. WriteE =E andwriteκfortheminimumcardinalityinwhichthereis
G
noG-anticlique. Toexcludetrivialcases, assumethatκisuncountable. Forthe
≤-inequalityintheproposition,letQbeaposetandσ beanE-pinnedQ-name.
ByExample2.3.5,theremustbeasetA⊂X suchthatQ(cid:13)rng(σ)=Aˇ. IfAis
not an anticlique then the E-pin (cid:104)Q,σ(cid:105) is trivial as it is forced to belong to the
single E-class consisting of enumerations of sets which are not anticliques. If A
isananticlique, thentheE-pin(cid:104)Q,σ(cid:105)isequivalenttoapinontheColl(ω,|A|)-
poset which has size less than κ.
For the ≥-inequality, suppose that A ⊂ X is an anticlique. A simple well-
foundednessargumentshowsthatAremainsananticliqueinanygenericexten-
sion. Thus, the Coll(ω,A)-name τ for a generic enumeration of A is E-pinned
A
an the E-pin (cid:104)Coll(ω,A),τ (cid:105) can be equivalent only to E-pins on posets which
A
make the cardinality of A countable.
The values of cardinals defined in this way are subject to forcing manipulations
and transfinite combinatorics. The interesting examples are always connected
withauniversalityfeatureofthehypergraphinquestion. Ourfirsttwoexamples
use Borel hypergraphs of finite arity.
Definition 2.5.28. LetX beaPolishspace. ABorelrelationR⊂[X]<ℵ0×X
is combinatorially universal if it has countable vertical sections and for every
cardinal κ and every relation T ⊂ κ<ℵ0 ×κ with countable vertical sections,
there is a c.c.c. poset P adding an injective function π: κ → X which is a
homomorphism of T to R.
It is not clear whether combinatorial universality of this sort is actually a prop-
ertyabsoluteamongtransitivemodelsofZFC,butalluniversalexamplesfound
in this section are absolutely universal.
Theorem2.5.29. LetX beaPolishspace. Thereisacombinatoriallyuniversal
Borel relation on [X]<ℵ0 ×X with countable vertical sections.