=== 块 150 ===

X assigns one of its elements, i.e. a selection function on
P(X). In consequence, the existence of balanced conditions for P is in ZF
equivalent to the statement that the space 2ω can be well-ordered.

Chapter 7
Ultrafilter forcings
Many applications of the axiom of choice rely on nonprincipal ultrafilters on
ω and their combinatorial properties. In this section, we will show that in
several cases, natural attempts to add an ultrafilter result in balanced forcings
and moreover the resulting generic ultrafilter can be characterized in a simple
way. The following definition and proposition will play a central role in several
arguments.
Definition 7.0.1. Let U be a nonprincipal ultrafilter on a set dom(U). An
infinite set a ⊂ dom(U) in some forcing extension diagonalizes U if for every
b∈U, a\b is finite.
Proposition 7.0.2. Let U be a nonprincipal ultrafilter on dom(U). Suppose
that Q ,Q are posets and τ ,τ are respective names for infinite subsets of
0 1 0 1
dom(U) which diagonalize U. Then Q ×Q (cid:13)τ ∩τ is infinite.
0 1 0 1
Proof. ThemostappealingargumentusesthegeneralProposition1.7.8onprod-
uct forcing extensions. Let H ,H ⊂Q ,Q be mutually generic filters and let
0 1 0 1
a = τ /H and a = τ /H . Suppose towards a contradiction that the inter-
0 0 0 1 1 1
section a ∩a is finite. By Proposition 1.7.8, there are sets b ,b ⊂dom(U) in
0 1 0 1
the ground model such that a ⊂b , a ⊂b , and b ∩b is finite. At most one
0 0 1 1 0 1
of the sets b ,b belongs to the ultrafilter U. If, say, b ∈/ U, then ω\b ∈ U,
0 1 0 0
violating the assumption that a diagonalizes the ultrafilter U.
0
7.1 A Ramsey ultrafilter
ThemostelementaryattemptataddinganonprincipalultrafilteristheposetP
ofinfinitesubsetsofω orderedbyinclusion. Here, theclassificationofbalanced
conditions is particularly appealing and simple.
Definition 7.1.1. Let U be a nonprincipal ultrafilter on ω. The symbol τ
U
denotes the Coll(ω,U)-name for the analytic collection of all infinite sets a⊂ω
which diagonalize the ultrafilter U.
157