=== 块 232 ===

(cid:13)τ =[rng(u)] . SinceW isasymmetricSolovayextensionofthemodel
E
M [H ], the forcing theorem applied in that model says that q (cid:13) xˇ ∈ τ. Since
y 1
x∈/ [rng(u)] , this is a contradiction.
E

244 CHAPTER 10. UNIFORMIZATION
10.4 Saint Raymond uniformization
Inthissection,wewillprovethatastrongversionofSaintRaymonduniformiza-
tionholdsingenericextensionsoftheSolovaymodelbytetheredbalancedforc-
ing.
Definition 10.4.1. Let I be a downward closed collection of closed subsets of
a Polish space X. I-Saint Raymond uniformization is the following statement:
for every set B ⊂2ω×X, the following are equivalent:
1. for every y ∈2ω, B is a union of a well-ordered collection of sets in I;
y
2. B = (cid:83) B where for each ordinal α and each y ∈2ω, the vertical section
α α
(B ) ⊂X is closed and belongs to I.
α y
Asintheprevioussection,onlythe(1)→(2)implicationhascontent. Inthecase
of I =the collection of singletons (plus the empty set), we can again derive the
familiar countable-to-one uniformization as a very special case. The following
theorem is stated using Convention 1.7.16.
Theorem 10.4.2. Let I be an analytic collection of closed subsets of a Polsh
space X. In tethered, cofinally balanced extensions of the symmetric Solovay
model, the I-Saint-Raymond uniformization holds.
Proof. Let κ be an inaccessible cardinal. Let P be a Suslin forcing which is
balanced cofinally below κ and tethered below κ. Let W be the symmetric
Solovay model derived from κ and work in W. Let p∈P be a condition and τ
aP-nameforasubsetof2ω×X whoseverticalsectionsarewell-orderedunions
of sets in I. Let z ∈ 2ω be a parameter such that p,τ are both definable from
z and some additional ground model parameters. Let G⊂P be a generic filter
meeting the condition p and let B =τ/G.
Work in W[G]. Fix a point y ∈ 2ω and consider the model M of sets
y
hereditarily definable from parameters G,z,y and parameters in the ground
model. Note that M is a model of choice and therefore belongs to W already;
y
in fact, it is an extension of the ground model by a poset of size <κ. We claim
that every nonempty vertical section B is a union of sets in I which are coded
y
in the model M . Once this is proved, one can decompose the set B into the
y
(cid:83)
unionB = B bysetting(cid:104)y,x(cid:105)∈B if(cid:104)y,x(cid:105)∈B andxbelongstotheα-th
α α α
set in I in the model M in the canonical well-ordering of the model M , and
y y
this α-th set is a subset of B.
To prove this, first use Claim 10.2.3 to find a balanced virtual condition p¯
in M whose realization belongs to the generic filter G. Work in the model M
y y
andarguethatColl(ω,<κ)(cid:13)p¯(cid:13) τ isaunionofacollectionofgroundmodel
P y
coded elements of I. By the forcing theorem applied in the model M , this will
y
complete the proof.
Toprovetheforcingstatementinthepreviousparagraph,workinM . Sup-
y
pose towards a contradiction that it fails. By the assumptions on the name τ,
there must be a poset R of size < κ and R -name η for a countable sequence
0 0