=== 块 72 ===

. Thevalidityofitem(2)ofTheorem2.7.1doesnotchangeifoneonlycon-
siderscountablemodels. ThisfollowsfromanimmediatedownwardL¨owenheim-
Skolemargument. Thecountablemodelversionof(2)isacoanalyticstatement,

2.7. ABSOLUTENESS 71
and as such it is absolute among all forcing extensions by the Mostowski abso-
luteness.
The absoluteness of the pinned status of analytic equivalence relations does
not allow a similar sweeping statement. Consider a Π1 set A ⊂ 2ω which con-
1
tains no perfect subset, but is uncountable in the constructible universe L [45,
Corollary 25.37]. Let E be the analytic equivalence relation on X = (2ω)ω de-
finedbyx E x ifeitherbothrng(x ),rng(x )havenonemptyintersectionwith
0 1 0 1
the complement of A, or rng(x ) = rng(x ). In L, the equivalence relation E
0 1
is not pinned, as witnessed by the Coll(ω,A)-name for the generic enumeration
of A. At the same time, in the Coll(ω,2ω)-extension of L, the (reinterpreta-
tion of the) set A is countable, containing only constructible elements, and in
consequence the equivalence relation E is smooth, so pinned. On the other
hand, in the presence of sufficiently large cardinals the pinned status of every
analytic equivalence relation is absolute by a proof similar to the proof of The-
orem 2.7.1 where we adjust Claim 2.7.2 to input a well-founded model M of
ZFC plus the statement that there is a propoer class of Woodin cardinals, and
output a well-founded model N correct about stationary sets. The adjustment
needs the classical well-foundedness results regarding the well-foundedness of
the stationary tower ultrapower in [99, 64]. We refrain from providing further
detail.
Another natural question concerns the computation of the various cardinal
invariants of equivalence relations in inner models. In particular, we would like
to see that if M ⊂ N are transitive models of ZFC containing the code for
an analytic equivalence relation E, then (κ(E))M ≤ (κ(E))N. Interestingly
enough,thisisnotclear,andweonlyhaveapositiveanswerinthecaseoforbit
equivalence relations and their relatives.
Theorem 2.7.4. Let E be an analytic equivalence relation on a Polish space X
almost reducible to an orbit equivalence relation. Let M be a transitive model of
large fragment of set theory containing the codes for E, the group action, and
the almost reduction. Then κ(E)M ≤κ(E) holds.
Proof. To begin, let Γ be a Polish group continuously acting on a Polish space
Y,inducinganorbitequivalencerelationF. Leth: X →Y beaBorelreduction
of E to F. Choose Γ,Y,h so that they belong to the model M.
Supposethattheconclusionofthetheoremfails. Then,writingκ=(κ(E))V,
inthemodelM thereexistsanE-pin(cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105)suchthatM |=(cid:104)Q,τ(cid:105)isnotequiv-
alent to any E-pin on a poset of cardinality less than κ. By Theorem 2.6.3
applied in the model M, this means that if N is a generic extension of M, then
N |=(∃x∈X Q(cid:13)τ E xˇ)→|κ|=ℵ ).
0
Let (cid:104)R,σ(cid:105) be an E-pin in V such that |R| < κ and Q × R (cid:13) τ E σ.
Let G ⊂ Q, H ⊂ R and K ⊂ P be filters mutually generic over V. Write
Γ
y = h(τ/G), y = h(σ/H), write γ ∈ Γ for the generic point associated with
0 1
the filter K, and let y = γ ·y . By the assumptions, y ,y , and y ∈ Y are
2 1 0 1 2
mutually orbit-equivalent points.