=== å— 120 ===

ee posets;
3. posets of the form P(Ï‰)/I where I is a countably separated Borel ideal on
Ï‰.

5.2. BALANCED CONDITIONS 125
q
p p
0 1
V[H ]
V[H ] ğ‘Ì… 1
0
p
V
Figure 5.1: A balanced virtual condition pÂ¯â‰¤p.

126 CHAPTER 5. BALANCED SUSLIN FORCING
Here, a tree poset on a Polish space X is an analytic family of closed subsets of
X closedundernonemptyintersectionswithclosuresofbasicopensets,ordered
by inclusion.
Proof. For (1), suppose towards a contradiction that (cid:104)P,â‰¤(cid:105) is a Suslin c.c.c.
poset and (cid:104)Q,Ï„(cid:105) is a balanced pair. For every maximal antichain A âŠ‚ P, its
maximalityisacoanalyticstatementandthereforeabsolutetotheQ-extension.
Thus, Q (cid:13) Ï„ is compatible with some element of A. The balance of Ï„ immedi-
atelyshowsthattherecanbeonlyoneelementofAwithwhichÏ„ iscompatible,
and the largest condition in Q identifies this element. It follows that the set
{pâˆˆP: Q(cid:13)Ï„ â‰¤pË‡intheseparativequotientofP}isafilteronP whichmeets
all maximal antichains, an impossibility in nonatomic posets.
For (2), suppose towards a contradiction that (cid:104)P,â‰¤(cid:105) is a tree poset on a
Polish space X and (cid:104)Q,Ï„(cid:105) is a balanced pair. For every basic open set O âŠ‚X,
the statement Ï„ âˆ©OÂ¯ (cid:54)= 0 must be decided by the largest condition in Q by the
balanceofÏ„. Thisdecisioncannotbepositivefortwodisjointbasicopensubsets
of X by the balance of Ï„ again. Thus, Ï„ would have to be forced by Q to be
a singleton (even a specific singleton in the ground model), an impossibility in
nonatomic tree posets.
For (3), suppose towards a contradiction that I is a countably separated
ideal on Ï‰ as witnessed by a countable separating set AâŠ‚P(Ï‰), meaning that
for every b âˆˆ I and c âˆˆ/ I there is a âˆˆ A such that bâˆ©a = 0 and câˆ©a âˆˆ/ I.
Suppose that (cid:104)Q,Ï„(cid:105) is a balanced pair in the poset P(Ï‰)/I; so Ï„ is a name
for an I-positive subset of Ï‰. By the balance of Ï„, for every set a âˆˆ A it
must be decided by the largest condition in Q whether Ï„ âˆ©aË‡ âˆˆ I or not. Let
B ={aâˆˆA: Q(cid:13)Ï„ âˆ©aË‡âˆˆ/ I}. Use the balance of the name Ï„ to argue that any
intersection of finitely many elements of B is an infinite set. Let b âŠ‚ Ï‰ be an
infinite set such that for every aâˆˆB, b\a is finite. Use the density of the ideal
I to argue that thinning out the set b if necessary, we may assume that b âˆˆ I.
It is now immediate that no set a âˆˆ A can separate the I-small set b from the
I-positive set Ï„ in the Q-extension: if aâˆˆA\B then Ï„ âˆ©aâˆˆI is forced, and if
aâˆˆB then bâˆ©a(cid:54)=0. This is a contradiction.
Most balanced Suslin posets used in this book are Ïƒ-closed. There are Ïƒ-closed
posetswhicharenotbalanced,suchastheonewhichaddsamaximalalmostdis-
joint family in P(Ï‰) by countable approximations, cf. Theorem 14.1.1. There
are some posets which are balanced and in ZFC even collapse â„µ , cf. The-
1
orem 8.7.2. Even such posets are valuable; remember that they prove their
worth in the choiceless symmetric Solovay extension. The balanced status of
certain posets is nonabsolute, see for example Theorem 8.1.19 or 8.5.5. Thus,
even though typically the balanced conditions correspond to traditional objects
of combinatorial set theory, the balanced status is a complicated matter. There
isonlyonegeneralpreservationtheorem, whichisneverthelessextremelyuseful
for obtaining consistency results: