=== 块 4 ===

ity: a set is determined by its extension. It is valuable to understand that the axiom of extension is not just a logically necessary property of equality but a non-trivial statement about belonging. One way to come to understand the point is to consider a par tially analogous situation in which the analogue of the axiom of extension Sec. 1 3 THE AXIOM OF EXTENSION does not hold. Suppose, for instance, that we consider human beings in stead of sets, and that, if x and A are human beings, we write x e A when ever x is an ancestor of A. (The ancestors of a human being are his par ents, his parents' parents, their parents, etc., etc.) The analogue of the axiom of extension would say here that if two human beings are equal, then they have the same ancestors (this is the "only if" part, and it is true), and also that if two human beings have the same ancestors, then they are equal (this is the "if" part, and it is false). If A and B are sets and if every element of A is an element of B, we say that A is a subset of B, or B includes A, and we write or B => A. The wording of the definition implies that each set must be considered to be included in itself (A C A) ; this fact is described by saying that set in clusion is reflexive. (Note that, in the same sense of the word, equality also is reflexive.) If A and B are sets such that A cZ B and 4^5, the word proper is used (proper subset, proper inclusion). If A, B, and C are sets such that A <Z B and B C C, then AcC; this fact is described by saying that set inclusion is transitive. (This property is also shared by equality.) If A and B are sets such that A d B and B CL A, then A and B have the same elements and therefore, by the axiom of extension, A = B. This fact is described by saying that set inclusion is antisymmetric. (In this respect set inclusion behaves differently from equality. Equality is symmetric, in the sense that if A = B, then necessarily B — A.) The axiom of extension can, in fact, be reformulated in these terms: if A and B are sets, then a necessary and sufficient condition that A = B is that both A C B and B C A. Correspondingly, almost all proofs of equalities between two sets A and B are split into two parts; first show that A CI B, and then show that Bel. Observe that belonging («) and inclusion (c) are conceptually very different things indeed. One important difference has already manifested itself above: inclusion is always reflexive, whereas it is not at all clear that belonging is ever reflexive. That is: A <z A is always true; is A e A ever true. It is certainly not true of any reasonable set that anyone has ever seen. Observe, along the same lines, that inclusion is transitive, whereas belonging is not. Everyday examples, involving, for instance, super-organ izations whose members are organizations, will readily occur to the inter ested reader. SECTION 2 THE AXIOM OF SPECIFICATION All the basic principles of set theory, except only the axiom of extension, are designed to make new sets out of old ones. The first and most impor- lant of these basic principles of set manufacture says, roughly speaking, that anything intelligent one can assert about the elements of a set specifies a subset, namely, the subset of those elements about which the assertion is true. Before formulating this principle in exact terms, we look at a heuristic example. Let A be the set of all men. The sentence "x is married" is true for some of the elements x of A and false for others. The principle we are illustrating is the one that justifies the passage from the given set A to the subset (namely, the set of all married men) specified by the given sentence. To indicate the generation of the subset, it is usually denoted by {x e A : x is married}. Similarly {x e A: x is not married} is the set of all bachelors; {x e A: the father of x is Adam} is the set that contains Cain and Abel and nothing else; and [x e A: x is the father of Abel} is the set that contains Adam and nothing else.