=== 块 38 ===

able, either g(A) C C or C is a proper subset of g(A). In the latter case A is a proper subset of a proper subset of g(A), and this contradicts the fact that g(A) — A cannot be more than a singleton. Consider next the collection 11 of all those sets A in 3o for which either AcCor g(C) CZ A. The collection It is somewhat smaller than the col lection of sets in 3o comparable with g{C) ; indeed if A e 11, then, since C C g(C), either A cz g(C) or g(C) cz A. Assertion: 11 is a tower. Since 0 cz C, the first condition on towers is satisfied. To prove the second condition, i.e., that if A e 11, then g(A) e 11, split the discussion into three cases. First: A is a proper subset of C. Then g(A) C C by the preceding paragraph, and therefore g(A) «il. Second: A = C. Then g(A) = g(C), so that g(C) cz g(A), and therefore g(A) ell. Third: g{C) CZ A. Then g(C) CZ g(A), and therefore g(A) e 11. The third condition on towers, i.e., that the union of a chain in 11 belongs to 11, is immediate from the defini tion of 11. Conclusion: 11 is a tower included in 30, and therefore, since 30 is the smallest tower, 11 = 30. The preceding considerations imply that for each comparable set C the set g(C) is comparable also. Reason: given C, form 11 as above; the fact that 11 = 30 means that if A « 3o, then either A cz C (in which case A cz g(C)) or g(C) cz A. Sec. 16 65 ZORN'S LEMMA We now know that 0 is comparable and that g maps comparable sets onto comparable sets. Since the union of a chain of comparable sets is comparable, it follows that the comparable sets (in 30) constitute a tower, and hence that they exhaust 3o; this is what we set out to prove about 30. Since 30 is a chain, the union, say A, of all the sets in 30 is itself a set in 3o- Since the union includes all the sets in 30, it follows that g(A) <z A. Since always A c g{A), it follows that A = g(A), and the proof of Zorn's lemma is complete. Exercise. Zorn's lemma is equivalent to the axiom of choice. [Hint for the proof: given a set X, consider functions / such that dom / C (P(X), ran / d X, and f(A) e A for all A in dom/; order these functions by extension, use Zorn's lemma to find a maximal one among them, and prove that if /is maximal, then dom / = <P(X) — {0}.] Consider each of the following statements and prove that they too are equivalent to the axiom of choice. (i) Every partially ordered set has a maximal chain (i.e., a chain that is not a proper subset of any other chain). (ii) Every chain in a partially ordered set is included in some maximal chain. (iii) Every partially ordered set in which each chain has a least upper bound has a maximal element. SECTION 17 WELL ORDERING A partially ordered set may not have a smallest element, and, even if it has one, it is perfectly possible that some subset will fail to have one. A partially ordered set is called well ordered (and its ordering is called a well ordering) if every non-empty subset of it has a smallest element. One consequence of this definition, worth noting even before we look at any examples and counterexamples, is that every well ordered set is totally ordered. Indeed, if x and y are elements of a well ordered set, then {x, y) is a non-empty subset of that well ordered set and has therefore a first ele ment; according as that first element is x or y, we have x ^ y or y ^ x. For each natural number n, the set of all predecessors of n (that is, in accordance with our definitions, the set n) is a well ordered set (ordered by magnitude), and the same is true of the set u of all natural numbers. The set o> X w, with (a, b) ^ (x, y) defined to mean (2a + 1)2" ^ (2x + 1)2* is not well ordered. One way to see this is to note that (a, 6 + 1) ?£ (a, b) for all a and b; it follows that the entire set w X w has no least element. Some subsets of u X w do have a least element. Consider, for example, the set E of all those pairs (a, b) for which (1, 1) ^ (a, b); the set E has (1, 1) for its least element.