=== 块 51 ===

can be well ordered in many ways. The ordinal number of a well ordered set measures the well ordering more than it measures the set. For a concrete example consider the set w of all natural numbers. Introduce a new order by placing 0 after everything else. (In other words, if n and to are non-zero natural num bers, then arrange them in their usual order; if, however, n = 0 and m 0, let to precede n.) The result is a well ordering of w; the ordinal number of this well ordering is w + 1. If X and Y are well ordered sets, then a necessary and sufficient condi tion that ord X < ord Y is that X be similar to an initial segment of Y. It follows that we could compare the ordinal sizes of two well ordered sets even without knowing anything about ordinal numbers; all we would need to know is the concept of similarity. Similarity was defined for ordered sets; the central concept for arbitrary unordered sets is that of equivalence. (Recall that two sets X and Y are called equivalent, X ~ Y, in case there exists a one-to-one correspondence between them.) If we replace similar ity by equivalence, then something like the suggestion of the preceding paragraph becomes usable. The point is that we do not have to know what size is if all we want is to compare sizes. If X and Y are sets such that X is equivalent to a subset of Y, we shall write X< Y. The notation is temporary and does not deserve a permanent name. As long as it lasts, however, it is convenient to have a way of referring to it; a reasonable possibility is to say that Y dominates X. The set of those or dered pairs (X, Y) of subsets of some set E for which X & Y constitutes a relation in the power set of E. The symbolism correctly suggests some of the properties of the concept that it denotes. Since the symbolism is remi niscent of partial orders, and since a partial order is reflexive, antisym metric, and transitive, we may expect that domination has similar properties. Reflexivity and transitivity cause no trouble. Since each set X is equivalent to a subset (namely, X) of itself, it follows that X & X for all X. If / is a one-to-one correspondence between X and a subset of Y, and if g is a one-to-one correspondence between Y and a subset of Z, then we may restrict g to the range of / and compound the result with /; the 88 Sec. 22 NAIVE SET THEORY conclusion is that X is equivalent to a subset of Z. In other words, if X < Y and Y < Z, then X < Z. The interesting question is that of antisymmetry. If X Y and Y X, can we conclude that X = Y. This is absurd; the assumptions are satisfied whenever X and Y are equivalent, and equivalent sets need not be identical. What then can we say about two sets if all we know is that each of them is equivalent to a subset of the other. The answer is con tained in the following celebrated and important result. Schroder-Bernstein theorem. If X & Y and Y £ X, then X ~ Y. Remark. Observe that the converse, which is incidentally a consider able strengthening of the assertion of reflexivity, follows trivially from the definition of domination. Proof. Let / be a one-to-one mapping from X into Y and let g be a one-to-one mapping from Y into X; the problem is to construct a one-to- one correspondence between X and Y. It is convenient to assume that the sets X and Y have no elements in common; if that is not true, we can so easily make it true that the added assumption involves no loss of generality. We shall say that an element x in X is the parent of the element f(x) in Y, and, similarly, that an element y in Y is the parent of g{y) in X. Each element x of X has an infinite sequence of descendants, namely, f(x), g(f(x)), f(g(f(x))), etc., and similarly, the descendants of an element y of Y are g(y), f(.g(y))' g(f(.g(y))), ete- This definition implies that each term in the sequence is a descendant of all preceding terms; we shall also say that each term in the sequence is an ancestor of all following terms.