=== 块 52 ===

(f(.g(y))), ete- This definition implies that each term in the sequence is a descendant of all preceding terms; we shall also say that each term in the sequence is an ancestor of all following terms. For each element (in either X or Y) one of three things must happen. If we keep tracing the ancestry of the element back as far as possible, then either we ultimately come to an element of X that has no parent (these orphans are exactly the elements of X — g(Y)), or we ultimately come to an element of Y that has no parent (Y — f(X)), or the lineage regresses ad infinitum. Let Xx be the set of those elements of X that originate in X (i.e., Xx consists of the elements of X — g(Y) together with all their descendants in X), let Xy be the set of those elements of X that originate in Y (i.e., Xy consists of all the descendants in X of the elements of Y — f(X)), and let Xx be the set of those elements of X that have no parent less ancestor. Partition Y similarly into the three sets Yx, Yy, and Ym. If x e Xx, then f(x) « Yx, and, in fact, the restriction of / to Xx is a one-to-one correspondence between Xx and Fy. If x e Xy, then x belongs to the domain of the inverse function g~^ and g~1(x) « Yy; in fact the re Sec. 22 THE SCHRODER-BERNSTEIN THEOREM 89 striction of g~ 1 to Xy is a one-to-one correspondence between Xy and Yy. If, finally, x e Xx, then/(x) e Ym and the restriction of/ to Xx is a one-to- one correspondence between Xx and Yx ; alternatively, if x « Xx, then g~l(x) e Ym and the restriction of g~1 to Xx is a one-to-one correspondence between Xx and Y^. By combining these three one-to-one correspond ences, we obtain a one-to-one correspondence between X and Y. Exercise. Suppose that / is a mapping from X into Y and g is a map ping from Y into X. Prove that there exist subsets A and B of X and F respectively, such that /(A) = B and gr(F - B) = X - A. This result can be used to give a proof of the Schroder-Bernstein theorem that looks quite different from the one above. By now we know that domination has the essential properties of a partial order; we conclude this introductory discussion by observing that the order is in fact total. The assertion is known as the comparability theorem for sets: it says that if X and Y are sets, then either X Y or Y X. The proof is an immediate consequence of the well ordering theorem and of the comparability theorem for well ordered sets. Well order both X and Y and use the fact that either the well ordered sets so obtained are similar or one of them is similar to an initial segment of the other; in the former case X and Y are equivalent, and in the latter one of them is equivalent to a subset of the other. SECTION 23 COUNTABLE SETS If X and Y are sets such that Y dominates X and X dominates Y, then the Schroder-Bernstein theorem applies and says that X is equivalent to Y. If Y dominates X but X does not dominate Y, so that X is not equiva lent to Y, we shall write X < Y, and we shall say that Y strictly dominates X. Domination and strict domination can be used to express some of the facts about finite and infinite sets in a neat form. Recall that a set X is called finite in case it is equivalent to some natural number; otherwise it is infinite. We know that if X < Y and Y is finite, then X is finite, and we know that to is infinite (§ 13); we know also that if X is infinite, then w X (§ 15). The converse of the last assertion is true and can be proved either directly (using the fact that a finite set cannot be equivalent to a proper subset of itself) or as an application of the Schroder-Bernstein the orem. (If w X, then it is impossible that there exist a natural number n such that X ~ n, for then we should have w n, and that contradicts the fact that o is infinite.) We have just seen that a set X is infinite if and only if w X; next we shall prove that X is finite if and only if X < u.