=== 块 59 ===

is; in practice it is easy to avoid confusion. The context, the use of special symbols for cardinal numbers, and an occasional explicit warning can make the discussion flow quite smoothly. Exercise. Prove that if a and are ordinal numbers, then card (a + /3) = card a + card /3 and card (a/3) = (card a) (card 0). Use the ordinal interpretation of the operations on the left side and the cardinal inter pretation on the right. One of the special symbols for cardinal numbers that is used very fre quently is the first letter (N, aleph) of the Hebrew alphabet. Thus in par ticular the smallest transfinite ordinal number, i.e., w, is a cardinal number, and, as such, it is always denoted by N0- Every one of the ordinal numbers that we have explicitly named so far is countable. In many of the applications of set theory an important role is played by the smallest uncountable ordinal number, frequently denoted by 12. The most important property of u is that it is an infinite well or 102 Sec. 25 NAIVE SET THEORY dered set each of whose initial segments is finite; correspondingly, the most important property of Q is that it is an uncountably infinite well ordered set each of whose initial segments is countable. The least uncountable ordinal number 0 clearly satisfies the defining condition of a cardinal number; in its cardinal role it is always denoted by Mi. Equivalently, Ni may be characterized as the least cardinal number strictly greater than N0, or, in other words, the immediate successor of N0 in the ordering of cardinal numbers. The arithmetic relation between No and Ni is the subject of a famous old problem about cardinal numbers. How do we get from No to Ni by arith metic operations. We know by now that the most elementary steps, in volving sums and products, just lead from No back to No again. The sim plest thing we know to do that starts with N0 and ends up with something larger is to form 2X°. We know therefore that Ni ^ 2X°. Is the inequality strict. Is there an uncountable cardinal number strictly less than 2X°. The celebrated continuum hypothesis asserts, as a guess, that the answer is no, or, in other words, that Ni = 2X°. All that is known for sure is that the continuum hypothesis is consistent with the axioms of set theory. For each infinite cardinal number a, consider the set c(a) of all infinite cardinal numbers that are strictly less than a. If a = N0, then c(a) = 0; if a = Mi, then c(a) = {N0}. Since c(a) is a well ordered set, it has an or dinal number, say a. The connection between a and a is usually expressed by writing a = Na. An equivalent definition of the cardinal numbers Na proceeds by transfinite induction; according to that approach N0 (for a > 0) is the smallest cardinal number that is strictly greater than all the N/j's with /3 < a. The generalized continuum hypothesis is the conjecture that Na+i = 2X" for each ordinal number a.