=== 块 47 ===

atural numbers, a = /3+. Not every transfinite ordinal number does have an immediate predecessor; the ones that do not are called limit numbers. Suppose now that Q is a collection of ordinal numbers. Since, as we have just seen, 6 is a continuation chain, it follows that the union a of the sets of 6 is a well ordered set such that for every J in 6, distinct from a itself, a is a continuation of £. The initial segment determined by an element in a is the same as the initial segment determined by that element whatever set of 6 it occurs in; this implies that a is an ordinal number. If f « e, then { ^ a; the number a is an upper bound of the elements of 80 Sec. 20 NAIVE SET THEORY 6. If /. is another upper bound of 6, then £C/3 whenever £ e 6, and there fore, by the definition of unions, a CZ /3. This implies that a is the least upper bound of 6; we have proved thus that every set of ordinal numbers has a supremum. Is there a set that consists exactly of all the ordinal numbers. It is easy to see that the answer must be no. If there were such a set, then we could form the supremum of all ordinal numbers. That supremum would be an ordinal number greater than or equal to every ordinal number. Since, however, for each ordinal number there exists a strictly greater one (for example, its successor), this is impossible; it makes no sense to speak of the "set" of all ordinals. The contradiction, based on the assumption that there is such a set, is called the Burali-Forti paradox. (Burali-Forti was one man, not two.) Our next purpose is to show that the concept of an ordinal number is not so special as it might appear, and that, in fact, each well ordered set resembles some ordinal number in all essential respects. "Resemblance" here is meant in the technical sense of similarity. An informal statement of the result is that each well ordered set can be counted. Counting theorem. Each well ordered set is similar to a unique ordinal number. Proof. Since for ordinal numbers similarity is the same as equality, uniqueness is obvious. Suppose now that X is a well ordered set and sup pose that an element a of X is such that the initial segment determined by each predecessor of a is similar to some (necessarily unique) ordinal num ber. If S(x, a) is the sentence that says "a is an ordinal number and s(x) = a," then, for each x in s(a), the set {a: S(x, a)} can be formed; in fact, that set is a singleton. The axiom of substitution implies the existence of a set consisting exactly of the ordinal numbers similar to the initial seg ments determined by the predecessors of a. It follows, whether a is the immediate successor of one of its predecessors or the supremum of them all, that s(a) is similar to an ordinal number. This argument prepares the way for an application of the principle of transfinite induction; the conclu sion is that each initial segment in X is similar to some ordinal number. This fact, in turn, justifies another application of the axiom of substitu tion, just like the one made above; the final conclusion is, as desired, that X is similar to some ordinal number. SECTION 21 ORDINAL ARITHMETIC For natural numbers we used the recursion theorem to define the arith metic operations, and, subsequently, we proved that those operations are related to the operations of set theory in various desirable ways. Thus, for instance, we know that the number of elements in the union of two disjoint finite sets E and F is equal to #(2?) + §{F). We observe now that this fact could have been used to define addition. If to and n are natural numbers, we could have defined their sum by finding disjoint sets E and F, with §(E) = m and = n, and writing m + n = §(E U F). Corresponding to what was done and to what could have been done for natural numbers, there are two standard approaches to ordinal arithmetic.