=== 块 57 ===

ollection is not empty; at the very least it contains the one-to-one correspondences between X X X and X for the countably infinite subsets X of A. The collection J is partially ordered by extension. The hypotheses of Zorn's lemma are easily verified, and it follows that contains a maximal element / with ran f = X, say. Since (card X)(card X) = card X, the proof may be completed by showing that card X = card A. Assume that card X < card A. Since card A is equal to the larger one of card X and card (A — X), this implies that card A = card (A — X), and hence that card X < card (A — X). From this it follows that A — X 98 Sec. 24 NAIVE SET THEORY has a subset Y equivalent to X. Since each of the disjoint sets X X Y, Y X X, and Y X Y is infinite and equivalent to X X X, hence to X, and hence to Y, it follows that their union is equivalent to Y. By combining / with a one-to-one correspondence between that union and Y, we obtain a proper extension of /, in contradiction to the assumed maximality. This implies that our present hypothesis (card X < card A) is untenable and hence completes the proof. Exercise. Prove that if a and b are cardinal numbers at least one of which is infinite, then a + b = db. Prove that if a and b are cardinal numbers such that a is infinite and b is finite, then ab = a. SECTION 25 CARDINAL NUMBERS We know quite a bit about cardinal numbers by now, but we still do not know what they are. Speaking vaguely, we may say that the cardinal number of a set is the property that the set has in common with all sets equivalent to it. We may try to make this precise by saying that the cardinal number of X is equal to the set of all sets equivalent to X, but the attempt will fail; there is no set as large as that. The next thing to try, suggested by analogy with our approach to the definition of natural numbers, is to define the cardinal number of a set X as some particular carefully selected set equivalent to X. This is what we proceed to do. For each set X there are too many other sets equivalent to X; our first problem is to narrow the field. Since we know that every set is equivalent to some ordinal number, it is not unnatural to look for the typical sets, the representative sets, among ordinal numbers. To be sure, a set can be equivalent to many ordinal numbers. A hopeful sign, however, is the fact that, for each set X, the ordinal numbers equiv alent to X constitute a set. To prove this, observe first that it is easy to produce an ordinal number that is surely greater, strictly greater, than all the ordinal numbers equivalent to X. Suppose in fact that 7 is an ordinal num ber equivalent to the power set <P(X). If a is an ordinal number equivalent to X, then the set a is strictly dominated by the set 7 (i.e., card a < card 7). It follows that we cannot have 7^0, and, consequently, we must have a < 7. Since, for ordinal numbers, a < 7 means the same thing as a e 7, we have found a set, namely 7, that contains every ordinal number equiv alent to X, and this implies that the ordinal numbers equivalent to X do constitute a set. Which one among the ordinal numbers equivalent to X deserves to be singled out and called the cardinal number of X. The question has only one natural answer. Every set of ordinal numbers is well ordered; the 99 100 Sec. 25 NAIVE SET THEORY least element of a well ordered set is the only one that seems to clamor for special attention. We are now prepared for the definition: a cardinal number is an ordinal number a such that if /3 is an ordinal number equivalent to a (i.e., card a = card f}), then a ^ /3. The ordinal numbers with this property have also been called initial numbers. If X is a set, then card X, the cardinal number of X (also known as the power of X), is the least ordinal number equivalent to X. Exercise. Prove that each infinite cardinal number is a limit number. Since each set is equivalent to its cardinal number, it follows that if card X = card Y, then X ~ Y.