=== 块 39 ===

has no least element. Some subsets of u X w do have a least element. Consider, for example, the set E of all those pairs (a, b) for which (1, 1) ^ (a, b); the set E has (1, 1) for its least element. Caution: E, considered as a partially ordered set on its own right, is still not well ordered. The trouble is that even though E has a least element, many subsets of E fail to have one; for an example consider the set of all those pairs (a, b) in E for which (a, 6) (1, 1). One more example: w X w is well ordered by its lexicographical ordering. One of the pleasantest facts about well ordered sets is that we can prove things about their elements by a process similar to mathematical induc tion. Precisely speaking, suppose that S is a subset of a well ordered set X, and suppose that whenever an element x of X is such that the entire initial segment s(x) is included in >S, then x itself belongs to S; the principle of transfinite induction asserts that under these circumstances we must 66 Sec. 17 67 WELL ORDERING have S = X. Equivalently: if the presence in a set of all the strict pred ecessors of an element always implies the presence of the element itself, then the set must contain everything. A few remarks are in order before we look at the proof. The statement of the ordinary principle of mathematical induction differs from that of transfinite induction in two conspicuous respects. One: the latter, instead of passing to each element from its predecessor, passes to each element from the set of all its predecessors. Two: in the latter there is no assump tion about a starting element (such as zero). The first difference is impor tant: an element in a well ordered set may fail to have an immediate pred ecessor. The present statement when applied to w is easily proved to be equivalent to the principle of mathematical induction; that principle, however, when applied to an arbitrary well ordered set, is not equivalent to the principle of transfinite induction. To put it differently: the two statements are in general not equivalent to each other; their equivalence in u is a happy but special circumstance. Here is an example. Let X be w+, i.e., X = w U {w}. Define order in X by ordering the elements of w as usual and by requiring that n < wior all n in w. The result is a well ordered set. Question: does there exist a proper subset S of X such that 0 e <S and such that n + I eS whenever n e S. Answer: yes, namely S = w. The second difference between ordinary induction and transfinite induc tion (no starting element required for the latter) is more linguistic than conceptual. If x0 is the smallest element of X, then s(x0) is empty, and, consequently, s(x0) C S; the hypothesis of the principle of transfinite in duction requires therefore that x0 belong to S. The proof of the principle of transfinite induction is almost trivial. If X — S is not empty, then it has a smallest element, say x. This implies that every element of the initial segment s(x) belongs to S, and hence, by the induction hypothesis, that x belongs to S. This is a contradiction (x cannot belong to both S and X — S) ; the conclusion is that X — S is empty after all. We shall say that a well ordered set A is a continuation of a well ordered set B, if, in the first place, B is a subset of A, if, in fact, B is an initial seg ment of A, and if, finally, the ordering of the elements in B is the same as their ordering in A. Thus if X is a well ordered set and if a and b are ele ments of X with b < a, then s(a) is a continuation of s(6), and, of course, X is a continuation of both s(a) and s(b). If 6 is an arbitrary collection of initial segments of a well ordered set, then 6 is a chain with respect to continuation; this means that 6 is a collec 68 Sec. 17 NAIVE SET THEORY tion of well ordered sets with the property that of any two distinct mem bers of the collection one is a continuation of the other. A sort of converse of this comment is also true and is frequently useful.