=== 块 24 ===

tivity means RR <z R. Exercise. (Assume in each case that / is a function from X to Y.) (i) If g is a function from Y to X such that gf is the identity on X, then / is one-to-one and g maps Y onto X. (ii) A necessary and sufficient condition that f(A fl B) = f(A) D f(B) for all subsets A and B of X is that / be one-to-one. (iii) A necessary and sufficient condition that f(X — A) C Y — f(A) for all subsets A of X is that / be one-to-one. (iv) A necessary and sufficient condition that Y — f(A) CI f(X — A) for all subsets A of X is that / map X onto Y. SECTION 11 NUMBERS How much is two. How, more generally, are we to define numbers. To prepare for the answer, let us consider a set X and let us form the col lection P of all unordered pairs {a, b], with a in X, b in X, and a ^ b. It seems clear that all the sets in the collection P have a property in com mon, namely the property of consisting of two elements. It is tempting to try to define "twoness" as the common property of all the sets in the collection P, but the temptation must be resisted; such a definition is, after all, mathematical nonsense. What is a "property". How do we know that there is only one property in common to all the sets in P. After some cogitation we might hit upon a way of saving the idea behind the proposed definition without using vague expressions such as "the com mon property." It is ubiquitous mathematical practice to identify a property with a set, namely with the set of all objects that possess the property; why not do it here. Why not, in other words, define "two" as the set P. Something like this is done at times, but it is not completely satisfying. The trouble is that our present modified proposal depends on P, and hence ultimately on X. At best the proposal defines twoness for subsets of X; it gives no hint as to when we may attribute twoness to a set that is not included in X. There are two ways out. One way is to abandon the restriction to a particular set and to consider instead all possible unordered pairs {a, b\ with a b. These unordered pairs do not constitute a set; in order to base the definition of "two" on them, the entire theory under consideration would have to be extended to include the "unsets" (classes) of another theory. This can be done, but it will not be done here; we shall follow a different route. How would a mathematician define a meter. The procedure analogous 42 Sec. 11 43 NUMBERS to the one sketched above would involve the following two steps. First, select an object that is one of the intended models of the concept being defined—an object, in other words, such that on intuitive or practical grounds it deserves to be called one meter long if anything does. Second, form the set of all objects in the universe that are of the same length as the selected one (note that this does not depend on knowing what a meter is), and define a meter as the set so formed. How in fact is a meter denned. The example was chosen so that the answer to this question should suggest an approach to the definition of numbers. The point is that in the customary definition of a meter the second step is omitted. By a more or less arbitrary convention an object is selected and its length is called a meter. If the definition is accused of circularity (what does "length" mean?), it can easily be converted into an unexceptionable demonstrative definition; there is after all nothing to stop us from defining a meter as equal to the selected object. If this demon strative approach is adopted, it is just as easy to explain as before when "one-meter-ness" shall be attributed to some other object, namely, just in case the new object has the same length as the selected standard. We comment again that to determine whether two objects have the same length depends on a simple act of comparison only, and does not depend on having a precise definition of length.