=== 块 26 ===

Sec. 11 45 NUMBERS so on." Incidentally, the symbol we are using for the set of all natural numbers (w) has a plurality of the votes of the writers on the subject, but nothing like a clear majority. In this book that symbol will be used sys tematically and exclusively in the sense defined above. The slight feeling of discomfort that the reader may experience in con nection with the definition of natural numbers is quite common and in most cases temporary. The trouble is that here, as once before (in the definition of ordered pairs), the object defined has some irrelevant struc ture, which seems to get in the way (but is in fact harmless). We want to be told that the successor of 7 is 8, but to be told that 7 is a subset of 8 or that 7 is an element of 8 is disturbing. We shall make use of this super structure of natural numbers just long enough to derive their most impor tant natural properties; after that the superstructure may safely be for gotten. A family {x,} whose index set is either a natural number or else the set of all natural numbers is called a sequence {finite or infinite, respectively). If {.A,-} is a sequence of sets, where the index set is the natural number n+, then the union of the sequence is denoted by U?-o Ai or Ao U • • • U An. If the index set is u, the notation is U,".oA, or AoUAiU^U--. Intersections and Cartesian products of sequences are denoted similarly by n?-o Ai, A0 n • • • 0 An, X?-o At, Ao X • • • X A„, and nr.oA,-, 4, n a1 n a2 n---. XT-oAi, A0 X Ay X A2 X---. The word "sequence" is used in a few different ways in the mathematical literature, but the differences among them are more notational than con ceptual. The most common alternative starts at 1 instead of 0; in other words, it refers to a family whose index set is w — {0} instead of u. SECTION 12 THE PEANO AXIOMS We enter now into a minor digression. The purpose of the digression is to make fleeting contact with the arithmetic theory of natural numbers. From the set-theoretic point of view this is a pleasant luxury. The most important thing we know about the set w of all natural num bers is that it is the unique successor set that is a subset of every successor set. To say that w is a successor set means that (I) 0 e w (where, of course, 0 = 0), and that (II) if n e w, then n+ e w (where n+ = n U {n}). The minimality property of w can be expressed by saying that if a subset S of w is a successor set, then S = w. Alterna tively, and in more primitive terms, (III) if S C w, if 0 « <S, and if n+ eS whenever n eS, then S = w. Property (III) is known as the principle of mathematical induction. We shall now add to this list of properties of w two others: (IV) n + 0 for all n in w, and (V) if n and m are in w, and if n+ = m+, then n = m. The proof of (IV) is trivial; since n+ always contains n, and since 0 is empty, it is clear that n+ is different from 0. The proof of (V) is not triv ial; it depends on a couple of auxiliary propositions. The first one asserts that something that ought not to happen indeed does not happen. Even 46 Sec. 12 47 THE PEANO AXIOMS if the considerations that the proof involves seem to be pathological and foreign to the arithmetic spirit that we expect to see in the theory of nat ural numbers, the end justifies the means. The second proposition refers to behavior that is quite similar to the one just excluded. This time, how ever, the apparently artificial considerations end in an affirmative result: something mildly surprising always does happen. The statements are as follows: (i) no natural number is a subset of any of its elements, and (ii) every element of a natural number is a subset of it. Sometimes a set with the property that it includes (c) everything that it contains (e) is called a transitive set. More precisely, to say that E is transitive means that if x e y and y eE, then x e E.