=== 块 5 ===

he set of all bachelors; {x e A: the father of x is Adam} is the set that contains Cain and Abel and nothing else; and [x e A: x is the father of Abel} is the set that contains Adam and nothing else. Warning: a box that con tains a hat and nothing else is not the same thing as a hat, and, in the same way, the last set in this list of examples is not to be confused with 4 Sec. 2 5 THE AXIOM OF SPECIFICATION Adam. The analogy between sets and boxes has many weak points, but sometimes it gives a helpful picture of the facts. All that is lacking for the precise general formulation that underlies the examples above is a definition of sentence. Here is a quick and informal one. There are two basic types of sentences, namely, assertions of be longing, x e A, and assertions of equality, A = B; all other sentences are obtained from such atomic sentences by repeated applications of the usual logical operators, subject only to the minimal courtesies of grammar and unambiguity. To make the definition more explicit (and longer) it is necessary to append to it a list of the "usual logi cal operators" and the rules of syntax. An adequate (and, in fact, redun dant) list of the former contains seven items: and, or (in the sense of "either—or—or both"), not, if—then—(or implies), if and only if, for some (or there exists), for all. As for the rules of sentence construction, they can be described as follows. (i) Put "not" before a sentence and enclose the result between parentheses. (The reason for parentheses, here and below, is to guarantee unambiguity. Note, incidentally, that they make all other punctuation marks unneces sary. The complete parenthetical equipment that the definition of sen tences calls for is rarely needed. We shall always omit as many parentheses as it seems safe to omit without leading to confusion. In normal mathe matical practice, to be followed in this book, several different sizes and shapes of parentheses are used, but that is for visual convenience only.) (ii) Put "and" or "or" or "if and only if" between two sentences and en close the result between parentheses. (iii) Replace the dashes in "if—then —" by sentences and enclose the result in parentheses. (iv) Replace the dash in "for some —" or in "for all—" by a letter, follow the result by a sentence, and enclose the whole in parentheses. (If the letter used does not occur in the sentence, no harm is done. According to the usual and natural convention "for some y {x t A)" just means "x « A". It is equally 6 Sec. 2 NAIVE SET THEORY harmless if the letter used has already been used with "for some —" or "for all—." Recall that "for some x (x e A)" means the same as "for some y (y e A)"; it follows that a judicious change of notation will always avert alphabetic collisions.) We are now ready to formulate the major principle of set theory, often referred to by its German name Aussonderungsaxiom. Axiom of specification. To every set A and to every condition S(x) there corresponds a set B whose elements are exactly those elements x of A for which S(x) holds. A "condition" here is just a sentence. The symbolism is intended to indi cate that the letter x is free in the sentence S(x) ; that means that x occurs in S(x) at least once without being introduced by one of the phrases "for some x" or "for all x." It is an immediate consequence of the axiom of extension that the axiom of specification determines the set B uniquely. To indicate the way B is obtained from A and from S(x) it is customary to write B = {xeA:S(x)}. To obtain an amusing and instructive application of the axiom of specifi cation, consider, in the role of S(x), the sentence not (x ex). It will be convenient, here and throughout, to write "x e' A" (alternatively "x i A") instead of "not (x e A)"; in this notation, the role of S(x) is now played by x «' x. It follows that, whatever the set A may be, if B = {x e A: x e' x}, then, for all y, (*) y eB if and only if (y e A and y e' y). Can it be that B e A.