=== 块 40 ===

f well ordered sets with the property that of any two distinct mem bers of the collection one is a continuation of the other. A sort of converse of this comment is also true and is frequently useful. If a collection 6 of well ordered sets is a chain with respect to continuation, and if U is the union of the sets of 6, then there is a unique well ordering of U such that U is a continuation of each set (distinct from U itself) in the collection 6. Roughly speaking, the union of a chain of well ordered sets is well ordered. This abbreviated formulation is dangerous because it does not explain that "chain" is meant with respect to continuation. If the ordering implied by the word "chain" is taken to be simply order-preserving inclusion, then the conclusion is not valid. The proof is straightforward. If a and b are in U, then there exist sets A and B in Q with ae A and b e B. Since either A = B or one of A and B is a continuation of the other, it follows that in every case both a and b belong to some one set in 6; the order of U is defined by ordering each pair \a,b] the way it is ordered in any set of 6 that contains both a and b. Since Q is a chain, this order is unambiguously determined. (An alter native way of defining the promised order in U is to recall that the given orders, in the sets of 6, are sets of ordered pairs, and to form the union of all those sets of ordered pairs.) A direct verification shows that the relation defined in the preceding paragraph is indeed an order, and that, moreover, its construction was forced on us at every step (i.e., that the final order is uniquely determined by the given orders). The proof that the result is actually a well ordering is equally direct. Each non-empty subset of U must have a non-empty intersection with some set in 6, and hence it must have a first element in that set; the fact that G is a continuation chain implies that that first ele ment is necessarily the first element of U also. Exercise. A subset A of a partially ordered set X is cofinal in X in case for each element x of X there exists an element a of A such that x ^ a. Prove that every totally ordered set has a cofinal well ordered subset. The importance of well ordering stems from the following result, from which we may infer, among other things, that the principle of transfinite induction is much more widely applicable than a casual glance might indicate. Well ordering theorem. Every set can be well ordered. Discussion. A better (but less traditional) statement is this: for each set X, there is a well ordering with domain X. Warning: the well ordering Sec. 17 69 WELL ORDERING is not promised to have any relation whatsoever to any other structure that the given set might already possess. If, for instance, the reader knows of some partially or totally ordered sets whose ordering is very definitely not a well ordering, he should not jump to the conclusion that he has dis covered a paradox. The only conclusion to be drawn is that some sets can be ordered in many ways, some of which are well orderings and others are not, and we already knew that. Proof. We apply Zorn's lemma. Given the set X, consider the collec tion W of all well ordered subsets of X. Explicitly: an element of W is a subset A of X together with a well ordering of A. We partially order *W by continuation. The collection "W is not empty, because, for instance, 0 e W. If X ^ 0, less annoying elements of W can be exhibited; one such is {(x, x)}, for any particular element x of X. If 6 is a chain in V?, then the union U of the sets in 6 has a unique well ordering that makes U "larger" than (or equal to) each set in 6; this is exactly what our preceding discussion of continua tion has accomplished. This means that the principal hypothesis of Zorn's lemma has been verified; the conclusion is that there exists a maximal well ordered set, say M , in V?. The set M must be equal to the entire set X.