=== 块 37 ===

partial ordering by the inclusion order in a suitable collection of sets. More precisely, we consider, for each element x in X, the weak initial segment s(x) consisting of x and all its predecessors. The range S of the function 3 (from X to (P(X)) is a certain collection of subsets of X, which we may, of course, regard as (par tially) ordered by inclusion. The function 5 is one-to-one, and a necessary and sufficient condition that S(x) C 8(?/) is that x ^ y. In view of this, the task of finding a maximal element in X is the same as the task of find ing a maximal set in S. The hypothesis about chains in X implies (and is, in fact, equivalent to) the corresponding statement about chains in S. Let 9C be the set of all chains in X; every member of 9C is included in S(x) for some x in X. The collection 9C is a non-empty collection of sets, partially ordered by inclusion, and such that if 6 is a chain in 9C, then the union of the sets in e (i.e., Ui(c^) belongs to 9C. Since each set in 9C is dominated by some set in S, the passage from S to EE cannot introduce any new maximal elements. One advantage of the collection 9C is the slightly more specific form that the chain hypothesis assumes; instead of saying that each chain e has some upper bound in S, we can say explicitly that the union of the sets of 6, which is clearly an upper bound of 6, is an ele ment of the collection 9C. Another technical advantage of 9C is that it con tains all the subsets of each of its sets; this makes it possible to enlarge non-maximal sets in 9C slowly, one element at a time. Now we can forget about the given partial order in X. In what follows we consider a non-empty collection 9C of subsets of a non-empty set X, subject to two conditions: every subset of each set in 9C is in 9C, and the union of each chain of sets in 9C is in 9C. Note that the first condition im plies that 0 e 9C. Our task is to prove that there exists in 9C a maximal set. Let / be a choice function for X, that is,/ is a function from the collection of all non-empty subsets of X to X such that f(A) e A for all A in the domain of /. For each set A in 9C, let A be the set of all those elements x of X whose adjunction to A produces a set in 9C; in other words, A = \x e X: A U {x} « 9C} . Define a function g from 9C to 9C as follows: if A — A* 0, then g(A) = A U {f(A - A)} ; if A - A - 0, then g(A) = A. It follows from the definition of A that A — A = 0 if and only if A is maximal. In these terms, therefore, what we must prove is that there exists in X a set A such that g{A) = A. It turns out that the crucial prop 64 Sec. 16 NAIVE SET THEORY erty of g is the fact that g(A) (which always includes .4) contains at most one more element than A. Now, to facilitate the exposition, we introduce a temporary definition. We shall say that a subcollection 3 of X is a tower if (i) 0 * 3, (ii) if A e 3, then g(A) < 3, (iii) if 6 is a chain in 3, then \J A , e A e 3. Towers surely exist; the whole collection 9C is one. Since the intersec tion of a collection of towers is again a tower, it follows, in particular, that if 30 is the intersection of all towers, then 30 is the smallest tower. Our immediate purpose is to prove that the tower 30 is a chain. Let us say that a set C in 3o is comparable if it is comparable with every set in 30; this means that if A e 3o, then either A cz C or C cz A. To say that 30 is a chain means that all the sets in 30 are comparable. Comparable sets surely exist; 0 is one of them. In the next couple of paragraphs we concentrate our attention on an arbitrary but temporarily fixed comparable set C. Suppose that A e 30 and A is a proper subset of C. Assertion: g(A) C C. The reason is that since C is comparable, either g(A) C C or C is a proper subset of g(A). In the latter case A is a proper subset of a proper subset of g(A), and this contradicts the fact that g(A) — A cannot be more than a singleton.