=== 块 17 ===

X. A relation, which we shall call X/e, is defined in X by writing * x/e y just in case x and y belong to the same set of the collection Q. We shall call X/ 6 the relation induced by the partition 6. In the preceding paragraph we saw how to associate a set of subsets of X with every equivalence relation in X and how to associate a relation in X with every partition of X. The connection between equivalence rela tions and partitions can be described by saying that the passage from 6 to X/ 6 is exactly the reverse of the passage from R to X/R. More explic itly: if R is an equivalence relation in X, then the set of equivalence classes is a partition of -X" that induces the relation R, and if 6 is a partition of X, then the induced relation is an equivalence relation whose set of equivalence classes is exactly 6. For the proof, let us start with an equivalence relation R. Since each x belongs to some equivalence class (for instance x e x/R), it is clear that the union of the equivalence classes is all X. If t e x/R D y/R, then xR z and z R y, and therefore xRy. This implies that if two equivalence classes have an element in common, then they are identical, or, in other words, that two distinct equivalence classes are always disjoint. The set of equivalence classes is therefore a partition. To say that two elements be long to the same set (equivalence class) of this partition means, by defini Sec. 7 29 RELATIONS tion, that they stand in the relation R to one another. This proves the first half of our assertion. The second half is easier. Start with a partition Q and consider the induced relation. Since every element of X belongs to some set of 6, re- flexivity just says that x and x are in the same set of 6. Symmetry says that if x and y are in the same set of 6, then y and x are in the same set of 6, and this is obviously true. Transitivity says that if x and y are in the same set of 6 and if y and z are in the same set of Q, then x and z are in the same set of G, and this too is obvious. The equivalence class of each x in X is just the set of 6 to which x belongs. This completes the proof of every thing that was promised. SECTION 8 FUNCTIONS If X and Y are sets, a. function from (or on) X to (or into) Y is a relation / such that dom/ = X and such that for each x in X there is a unique ele ment y in Y with (x, y) ef. The uniqueness condition can be formulated explicitly as follows : if (x,y) ef and (x, z) « /, then y = z. For each x in X, the unique y in 7 such that (x, y) ef is denoted by/(x). For functions this notation and its minor variants supersede the others used for more general relations; from now on, if / is a function, we shall write /(x) = y instead of (x, y) ef or xf y. The element y is called the value that the function / assumes (or takes on) at the argument x; equivalently we may say that / sends or maps or transforms x onto y. The words map or map ping, transformation, correspondence, and operator are among some of the many that are sometimes used as synonyms for function. The symbol f.X -> Y is sometimes used as an abbreviation for "/ is a function from X to Y." The set of all functions from X to Y is a subset of the power set <P(X X Y) ; it will be denoted by Yx. The connotations of activity suggested by the synonyms listed above make some scholars dissatisfied with the definition according to which a function does not do anything but merely is. This dissatisfaction is re flected in a different use of the vocabulary : function is reserved for the un defined object that is somehow active, and the set of ordered pairs that we have called the function is then called the graph of the function. It is easy to find examples of functions in the precise set-theoretic sense of the word in both mathematics and everyday life; all we have to look for is information, not necessarily numerical, in tabulated form. One example 1 30 Sec.