=== 块 34 ===

he behavior of partially ordered sets and their subsets. To aid him in this enterprise, we proceed to describe three special partially ordered sets with some amusing properties. (i) The set is w X w. To avoid any possible confusion, we shall denote the order we are about to introduce by the neutral symbol R. If (a, b) and (x, y) are ordered pairs of natural numbers, then (a, b) R (x, y) means, by definition, that (2a + 1) ■2" ^ (2x + l)-2b. (Here the inequal ity sign refers to the customary ordering of natural numbers.) The reader who is not willing to pretend ignorance of fractions will recognize that, 2a + 1 except for notation, what we just defined is the usual order for —~i— and 2x + 1 ——— . (ii) The set is w X w again. Once more we use a neutral symbol 58 Sec. 14 NAIVE SET THEORY for the order; say S. If (a, b) and (x, y) are ordered pairs of natural num bers, then (a, b) S {x, y) means, by definition, that either a is strictly less than x (in the customary sense), or else a = x and b ^ y. Because of its resemblance to the way words are arranged in a dictionary, this is called the lexicographical order of w X w. (iii) Once more the set is w X w. The present order relation, say T, is such that (a, 6) T (x, y) means, by defini tion, that a 5= x and b ^ y. SECTION 15 THE AXIOM OF CHOICE For the deepest results about partially ordered sets we need a new set- theoretic tool; we interrupt the development of the theory of order long enough to pick up that tool. We begin by observing that a set is either empty or it is not, and, if it is not, then, by the definition of the empty set, there is an element in it. This remark can be generalized. If X and Y are sets, and if one of them is empty, then the Cartesian product X X Y is empty. If neither X nor Y is empty, then there is an element x in X, and there is an element y in Y; it follows that the ordered pair (a;, y) belongs to the Cartesian product X X Y, so that X X Y is not empty. The preceding remarks constitute the cases n = 1 and n = 2 of the following assertion: if {X,} is a finite sequence of sets, for i in n, say, then a necessary and sufficient condition that their Cartesian product be empty is that at least one of them be empty. The assertion is easy to prove by induction on n. (The case n = 0 leads to a slippery argument about the empty function; the uninterested reader may start his induction at 1 instead of 0.) The generalization to infinite families of the non-trivial part of the asser tion in the preceding paragraph (necessity) is the following important prin ciple of set theory. Axiom of choice. The Cartesian product of a non-empty family of non empty sets is non-empty. In other words: if {X,} is a family of non-empty sets indexed by a non empty set J, then there exists a family {x,}, i « I, such that z,- « Xi for each i in /. Suppose that 6 is a non-empty collection of non-empty sets. We may regard 6 as a family, or, to say it better, we can convert 6 into an indexed set, just by using the collection 6 itself in the role of the index set and using the identity mapping on 6 in the role of the indexing. The axiom 59 60 Sec 15 NAIVE SET THEORY of choice then says that the Cartesian product of the sets of 6 has at least one element. An element of such a Cartesian product is, by definition, a function (family, indexed set) whose domain is the index set (in this case 6) and whose value at each index belongs to the set bearing that index. Con clusion : there exists a function / with domain e such that if A e 6, then f(A) e A. This conclusion applies, in particular, in case 6 is the collection of all non-empty subsets of a non-empty set X. The assertion in that case is that there exists a function / with domain (P(X) — {0} such that if A is in that domain, then f(A) e A. In intuitive language the function / can be described as a simultaneous choice of an element from each of many sets; this is the reason for the name of the axiom.