=== 块 35 ===

A is in that domain, then f(A) e A. In intuitive language the function / can be described as a simultaneous choice of an element from each of many sets; this is the reason for the name of the axiom. (A function that in this sense "chooses" an element out of each non-empty subset of a set X is called a choice function for X.) We have seen that if the collection of sets we are choosing from is finite, then the possibility of simultaneous choice is an easy consequence of what we knew before the axiom of choice was even stated; the role of the axiom is to guarantee that possibility in infinite cases. The two consequences of the axiom of choice in the preceding paragraph (one for the power set of a set and the other for more general collections of sets) are in fact just reformulations of that axiom. It used to be considered important to examine, for each consequence of the axiom of choice, the ex tent to which the axiom is needed in the proof of the consequence. An alternative proof without the axiom of choice spelled victory; a converse proof, showing that the consequence is equivalent to the axiom of choice (in the presence of the remaining axioms of set theory) meant honorable defeat. Anything in between was considered exasperating. As a sample (and an exercise) we mention the assertion that every relation includes a function with the same domain. Another sample: if Q is a collection of pairwise disjoint non-empty sets, then there exists a set A such that A D C is a singleton for each C in 6. Both these assertions are among the many known to be equivalent to the axiom of choice. As an illustration of the use of the axiom of choice, consider the assertion that if a set is infinite, then it has a subset equivalent to ai. An informal argument might run as follows. If X is infinite, then, in particular, it is not empty (that is, it is not equivalent to 0) ; hence it has an element, say x0. Since X is not equivalent to 1, the set X — {x0} is not empty; hence it has an element, say xi. Repeat this argument ad infinitum; the next step, for instance, is to say that X — {x0, xi} is not empty, and, therefore, it has an element, say x2. The result is an infinite sequence {xn} of distinct elements of X; q.e.d. This sketch of a proof at least has the virtue of being Sec. 15 61 THE AXIOM OF CHOICE honest about the most important idea behind it; the act of choosing an element from a non-empty set was repeated infinitely often. The mathe matician experienced in the ways of the axiom of choice will often offer such an informal argument; his experience enables him to see at a glance how to make it precise. For our purposes it is advisable to take a longer look. Let / be a choice function for X; that is,/ is a function from the collec tion of all non-empty subsets of X to X such that f(A) e A for all A in the domain of/. Let 6 be the collection of all finite subsets of X. Since X is infinite, it follows that if A e 6, then X — A is not empty, and hence that X — A belongs to the domain of /. Define a function g from 6 to 6 by writing g(A) = A U {f(X — A) J. In words: g(A) is obtained by ad joining to A the element that / chooses from X — A. We apply the re cursion theorem to the function g; we may start it rolling with, for in stance, the set 0. The result is that there exists a function U from w into 6 such that U(0) = 0 and U(n+) = U(n) U [f{X - C/(n))} for every natural number n. Assertion: if v(n) = f(X — U(n)), then v is a one-to-one correspondence from w to X, and hence, indeed, u is equivalent to some subset of -X" (namely the range of v). To prove the assertion, we make a series of elementary observations; their proofs are easy conse quences of the definitions. First: v(n) «' U(n) for all n. Second: v(n) e U(n+) for all n. Third: if n and m are natural numbers and n i£ m, then U(n) C U(m). Fourth: if n and m are natural numbers and n < m, then v(n) 7* v(m).