=== 块 48 ===

d F, with §(E) = m and = n, and writing m + n = §(E U F). Corresponding to what was done and to what could have been done for natural numbers, there are two standard approaches to ordinal arithmetic. Partly for the sake of variety, and partly because in this context recursion seems less natural, we shall emphasize the set-theoretic approach instead of the recursive one. We begin by pointing out that there is a more or less obvious way of putting two well ordered sets together to form a new well ordered set. Informally speaking, the idea is to write down one of them and then to follow it by the other. If we try to say this rigorously, we immediately encounter the difficulty that the two sets may not be disjoint. When are we supposed to write down an element that is common to the two sets. The way out of the difficulty is to make the sets disjoint. This can be done by painting their elements different colors. In more mathematical language, replace the elements of the sets by those same elements taken together with some distinguishing object, using two different objects for the two sets. In completely mathematical language: if E and F are arbi trary sets, let E be the set of all ordered pairs (x, 0) with x in E, and let F be the set of all ordered pairs (x, 1) with x in F. The sets E and P are clearly disjoint. There is an obvious one-to-one correspondence between E and E (x —* (x, 0)) and another one between F and P (x —> (x, 1)). 81 82 Sec. 21 NAIVE SET THEORY These correspondences can be used to carry over whatever structure E and F may possess (for example, order) to E and F. It follows that any time we are given two sets, with or without some additional structure, we may always replace them by disjoint sets with the same structure, and hence we may assume, with no loss of generality, that they were disjoint in the first place. Before applying this construction to ordinal arithmetic, we observe that it can be generalized to arbitrary families of sets. If, indeed, {#,} is a family, write Ei for the set of all ordered pairs (x, i), with x in (In other words, Ei = Ei X The family {Ei} is pairwise disjoint, and it can do anything the original family {2?,} could do. Suppose now that E and F are disjoint well ordered sets. Define order in E U F so that pairs of elements in E, and also pairs of elements in F, retain the order they had, and so that each element of E precedes each element of F. (In ultraformal language: if R and S are the given order relations in E and F respectively, let E U F be ordered by R U S U (E X F).) The fact that E and F were well ordered implies that E U F is well ordered. The well ordered set E U F is called the ordinal sum of the well ordered sets E and F. There is an easy and worth while way of extending the concept of ordinal sum to infinitely many summands. Suppose that {Ei} is a disjoint family of well ordered sets indexed by a well ordered set /. The ordinal sum of the family is the union (J,- Ei, ordered as follows. If a and b are elements of the union, with a e Ei and b « Ej, then a < b means that either i < j or else i = j and a precedes b in the given order of i?,-. The definition of addition for ordinal numbers is now child's play. For each well ordered set X, let ord X be the unique ordinal number similar to X. (If X is finite, then ord X is the same as the natural number de fined earlier.) If a and (3 are ordinal numbers, let A and B be disjoint well ordered sets with ord A = a and ord B = /3, and let C be the ordinal sum of A and B. The sum a + 0 is, by definition, the ordinal number of C, so that ord A + ord B = ord C. It is important to note that the sum a + /3 is independent of the particular choice of the sets A and B; any other pair of disjoint sets, with the same ordinal numbers, would have given the same result. These considerations extend without difficulty to the infinite case.