=== 块 41 ===

This means that the principal hypothesis of Zorn's lemma has been verified; the conclusion is that there exists a maximal well ordered set, say M , in V?. The set M must be equal to the entire set X. Reason : if x is an element of X not in M, then M can be enlarged by putting x after all the elements of M. The rigorous formulation of this unambigu ous but informal description is left as an exercise for the reader. With that out of the way, the proof of the well ordering theorem is complete. Exercise. Prove that a totally ordered set is well ordered if and only if the set of strict predecessors of each element is well ordered. Does any such condition apply to partially ordered sets. Prove that the well order ing theorem implies the axiom of choice (and hence is equivalent to that axiom and to Zorn's lemma). Prove that if R is a partial order in a set X, then there exists a total order S in X such that R C <S; in other words, every partial order can be extended to a total order without enlarging the domain. SECTION 18 TRANSFINITE RECURSION The process of "definition by induction" has a transfinite analogue. The ordinary recursion theorem constructs a function on w; the raw mate rial is a way of getting the value of the function at each non-zero element n of o} from its value at the element preceding n. The transfinite analogue constructs a function on any well ordered set W; the raw material is a way of getting the value of the function at each element a of W from its values at all the predecessors of a. To be able to state the result concisely, we introduce some auxiliary concepts. If a is an element of a well ordered set W, and if X is an arbi trary set, then by a sequence of type a in X we shall mean a function from the initial segment of a in W into X. The sequences of type a, for a in w+, are just what we called sequences before, finite or infinite according as a < w or a = w. If U is a function from W to X, then the restriction of U to the initial segment s(a) of a is an example of a sequence of type a for each a in W; in what follows we shall find it convenient to denote that sequence by Ua (instead of U | s(a)). A sequence function of type W in X is a function / whose domain consists of all sequences of type a in X, for all elements a in W, and whose range is included in X. Roughly speaking, a sequence function tells us how to "lengthen" a sequence; given a sequence that stretches up to (but not in cluding) some element of W we can use a sequence function to tack on one more term. Transfinite recursion theorem. If W is a well ordered set, and if f is a sequence function of type W in a set X, then there exists a unique function UJrom W iaie X such that U(a) = f(Ua) for each a in W. 70 Sec. 18 71 TRANSFINITE RECURSION Proof. The proof of uniqueness is an easy transfinite induction. To prove existence, recall that a function from W to X is a certain kind of subset of W X X; we shall construct U explicitly as a set of ordered pairs. Call a subset A of W X X f-closed if it has the following property: when ever a e W and t is a sequence of type a included in A (that is, (c, <(c)) e A for all c in the initial segment s(a)), then (a,/(<)) « A. Since W X X itself is /-closed, such sets do exist; let U be the intersection of them all. Since U itself is /-closed, it remains only to prove that U is a function. We are to prove, in other words, that for each c in W there exists at most one ele ment x in X such that (c, x) e U. (Explicitly : if both (c, x) and (c, y) be long to U, then x = y.) The proof is inductive. Let S be the set of all those elements c of W for which it is indeed true that (c, x) « U for at most one x. We shall prove that if s(a) C 5, then a eS. To say that s(a) C S means that if c < a in W, then there exists a unique element x in X such that (c, a;) e U. The correspondence c — ► x thereby defined is a sequence of type a, say t, and t c U. If a does not belong to S, then (a, y) e U for some ?/ different from /(f).