=== 块 25 ===

elected standard. We comment again that to determine whether two objects have the same length depends on a simple act of comparison only, and does not depend on having a precise definition of length. Motivated by the considerations described above, we have earlier denned 2 as some particular set with (intuitively speaking) exactly two elements. How was that standard set selected. How should other such standard sets for other numbers be selected. There is no compelling mathematical rea son for preferring one answer to this question to another; the whole thing is largely a matter of taste. The selection should presumably be guided by considerations of simplicity and economy. To motivate the particular selection that is usually made, suppose that a number, say 7, has already been defined as a set (with seven elements). How, in this case, should we define 8. Where, in other words, can we find a set consisting of exactly eight elements. We can find seven elements in the set 7 ; what shall we use as an eighth to adjoin to them. A reasonable answer to the last question is the number (set) 7 itself; the proposal is to define 8 to be the set consist ing of the seven elements of 7, together with 7. Note that according to this proposal each number will be equal to the set of its own predecessors. The preceding paragraph motivates a set-theoretic construction that makes sense for every set, but that is of interest in the construction of numbers only. For every set x we define the successor x + of x to be the set obtained by adjoining x to the elements of x ; in other words, 44 Sec. 11 NAIVE SET THEORY x+ = x U [x]. (The successor of a; is frequently denoted by x1.) We are now ready to define the natural numbers. In defining 0 to be a set with zero elements, we have no choice; we must write (as we did) 0 = 0. If every natural number is to be equal to the set of its predecessors, we have no choice in defining 1, or 2, or 3 either; we must write 1 = 0+(= {0}), 2 = l+(= {0,1}), 3 = 2+( = {0,1,2}), etc. The "etc." means that we hereby adopt the usual notation, and, in what follows, we shall feel free to use numerals such as "4" or "956" with out any further explanation or apology. From what has been said so far it does not follow that the construction of successors can be carried out ad infinitum within one and the same set. What we need is a new set-theoretic principle. Axiom of infinity. There exists a set containing 0 and containing the successor of each of its elements. The reason for the name of the axiom should be clear. We have not yet given a precise definition of infinity, but it seems reasonable that sets such as the ones that the axiom of infinity describes deserve to be called infinite. We shall say, temporarily, that a set A is a successor set if 0 e A and if x+ e A whenever x e A. In this language the axiom of infinity simply says that there exists a successor set A. Since the intersection of every (non empty) family of successor sets is a successor set itself (proof?), the inter section of all the successor sets included in A is a successor set w. The set w is a subset of every successor set. If, indeed, B is an arbitrary successor set, then so is A D B. Since A H B C A, the set A R B is one of the sets that entered into the definition of w; it follows that w C A 0 B, and, consequently, that oiCB. The minimality property so established uniquely characterizes w; the axiom of extension guarantees that there can be only one successor set that is included in every other successor set. A natural number is, by definition, an element of the minimal successor set w. This definition of natural numbers is the rigorous counterpart of the intuitive description according to which they consist of 0, 1, 2, 3, "and Sec. 11 45 NUMBERS so on." Incidentally, the symbol we are using for the set of all natural numbers (w) has a plurality of the votes of the writers on the subject, but nothing like a clear majority.