=== 块 15 ===

d coordinates, that Cartesian products can be formed, and that every set of ordered pairs is a subset of some Cartesian product; which particular approach is used to achieve these ends is immaterial. It is easy to locate the source of the mistrust and suspicion that many mathematicians feel toward the explicit definition of ordered pair given above. The trouble is not that there is anything wrong or anything miss ing; the relevant properties of the concept we have defined are all correct (that is, in accord with the demands of intuition) and all the correct proper ties are present. The trouble is that the concept has some irrelevant prop erties that are accidental and distracting. The theorem that (a, b) = (x, y) if and only if a = x and 6 = y is the sort of thing we expect to learn about ordered pairs. The fact that {a, b} « (a, 6), on the other hand, seems accidental; it is a freak property of the definition rather than an intrinsic property of the concept. The charge of artificiality is true, but it is not too high a price to pay for conceptual economy. The concept of an ordered pair could have been introduced as an additional primitive, axiomatically endowed with just the right properties, no more and no less. In some theories this is done. The mathematician's choice is between having to remember a few more axioms and having to forget a few accidental facts; the choice is pretty clearly a matter of taste. Similar choices occur frequently in mathematics; in this book, for instance, we shall encounter them again in connection with the definitions of numbers of various kinds. Exercise. If A, B, X, and Y are sets, then (i) (AU B)XX = (AXX)U (BXX), (ii) (A n b) x (x n Y) = (A x x) n (s x y), (iii) (A - B) X X = (A X X) - (B X X). If either A = 0 or B = 0, then A X B = 0, and conversely. If A C X and B C Y, then A X B C X X Y, and (provided A X B 0) conversely. SECTION 7 RELATIONS Using ordered pairs, we can formulate the mathematical theory of rela tions in set-theoretic language. By a relation we mean here something like marriage (between men and women) or belonging (between elements and sets). More explicitly, what we shall call a relation is sometimes called a binary relation. An example of a ternary relation is parenthood for people (Adam and Eve are the parents of Cain). In this book we shall have no occasion to treat the theory of relations that are ternary, quaternary, or worse. Looking at any specific relation, such as marriage for instance, we might be tempted to consider certain ordered pairs {x, y), namely just those for which x is a man, y is a woman, and x is married to y. We have not yet seen the definition of the general concept of a relation, but it seems plausi ble that, just as in this marriage example, every relation should uniquely determine the set of all those ordered pairs for which the first coordinate does stand in that relation to the second. If we know the relation, we know the set, and, better yet, if we know the set, we know the relation. If, for instance, we were presented with the set of ordered pairs of people that corresponds to marriage, then, even if we forgot the definition of marriage, we could always tell when a man x is married to a woman y and when not; we would just have to see whether the ordered pair (x, y) does or does not belong to the set. We may not know what a relation is, but we do know what a set is, and the preceding considerations establish a close connection between relations and sets. The precise set-theoretic treatment of relations takes advantage of that heuristic connection; the simplest thing to do is to define a relation to be the corresponding set. This is what we do; we hereby define a rela tion as a set of ordered pairs. Explicitly: a set 22 is a relation if each ele 26 Sec. 7 27 RELATIONS ment of R is an ordered pair; this means, of course, that if z « R, then there exist x and y so that z = (x, y).