=== 块 36 ===

First: v(n) «' U(n) for all n. Second: v(n) e U(n+) for all n. Third: if n and m are natural numbers and n i£ m, then U(n) C U(m). Fourth: if n and m are natural numbers and n < m, then v(n) 7* v(m). (Reason: v(n) e U(m) but v(m) «' U(m).) The last observa tion implies that v maps distinct natural numbers onto distinct elements of X; all we have to remember is that of any two distinct natural numbers one of them is strictly smaller than the other. The proof is complete; we know now that every infinite set has a subset equivalent to u. This result, proved here not so much for its intrinsic in terest as for an example of the proper use of the axiom of choice, has an interesting corollary. The assertion is that a set is infinite if and only if it is equivalent to a proper subset of itself. The "if" we already know; it says merely that a finite set cannot be equivalent to a proper subset. To prove the "only if," suppose that X is infinite, and let v be a one-to-one correspondence from w into X. If x is in the range of v, say x = v(n), write h(x) = v(n+); if a; is not in the range of v, write h(x) = x. It is easy to verify that A is a one-to-one correspondence from X into itself. Since the range of h is a proper subset of X (it does not contain v(0)), the proof of the corollary is complete. The assertion of the corollary was used by Dede- kind as the very definition of infinity. SECTION 16 ZORN'S LEMMA An existence theorem asserts the existence of an object belonging to a certain set and possessing certain properties. Many existence theorems can be formulated (or, if need be, reformulated) so that the underlying set is a partially ordered set and the crucial property is maximality. Our next purpose is to state and prove the most important theorem of this kind. Zorn's lemma. If X is a partially ordered set such that every chain in X has an upper bound, then X contains a maximal element. Discussion. Recall that a chain is a totally ordered set. By a chain "in X" we mean a subset of X such that the subset, considered as a par tially ordered set on its own right, turns out to be totally ordered. If A is a chain in X, the hypothesis of Zorn's lemma guarantees the existence of an upper bound for A in X; it does not guarantee the existence of an upper bound for A in A. The conclusion of Zorn's lemma is the existence of an element a in X with the property that if a ^ x, then necessarily a = x. The basic idea of the proof is similar to the one used in our preceding discussion of infinite sets. Since, by hypothesis, X is not empty, it has an element, say x0. If x0 is maximal, stop here. If it is not, then there exists an element, say xu strictly greater than x0. If xi is maximal, stop here; otherwise continue. Repeat this argument ad infinitum; ultimately it must lead to a maximal element. The last sentence is probably the least convincing part of the argument; it hides a multitude of difficulties. Observe, for instance, the following possibility. It could happen that the argument, repeated ad infinitum, leads to a whole infinite sequence of non-maximal elements; what are we to do in that case. The answer is that the range of such an infinite se quence is a chain in X, and, consequently, has an upper bound; the thing to do is to start the whole argument all over again, beginning with that 62 Sec. 16 63 ZORN'S LEMMA upper bound. Just exactly when and how all this comes to an end is ob scure, to say the least. There is no help for it; we must look at the precise proof. The structure of the proof is an adaptation of one originally given by Zermelo. Proof. The first step is to replace the abstract partial ordering by the inclusion order in a suitable collection of sets. More precisely, we consider, for each element x in X, the weak initial segment s(x) consisting of x and all its predecessors.