=== 块 6 ===

ation, the role of S(x) is now played by x «' x. It follows that, whatever the set A may be, if B = {x e A: x e' x}, then, for all y, (*) y eB if and only if (y e A and y e' y). Can it be that B e A. We proceed to prove that the answer is no. In deed, if B e A, then either B e B also (unlikely, but not obviously impos sible), or else B e' B. If B e B, then, by (*), the assumption B e A yields B e' B—a contradiction. If B e' B, then, by (*) again, the assumption B e A yields B e B—a contradiction again. This completes the proof that B e A is impossible, so that we must have B «' A. The most interesting part of this conclusion is that there exists something (namely B) that does not belong to A. The set A in this argument was quite arbitrary. We have proved, in other words, that nothing contains everything, Sec. 2 7 THE AXIOM OF SPECIFICATION or, more spectacularly, there is no universe. "Universe" here is used in the sense of "universe of discourse," meaning, in any particular discussion, a set that contains all the objects that enter into that discussion. In older (pre-axiomatic) approaches to set theory, the existence of a universe was taken for granted, and the argument in the preceding para graph was known as the Russell paradox. The moral is that it is impossi ble, especially in mathematics, to get something for nothing. To specify a set, it is not enough to pronounce some magic words (which may form a sentence such as "x e x"); it is necessary also to have at hand a set to whose elements the magic words apply. SECTION 3 UNORDERED PAIRS For all that has been said so far, we might have been operating in a vacuum. To give the discussion some substance, let us now officially as sume that there exists a set. Since later on we shall formulate a deeper and more useful existential assumption, this assumption plays a temporary role only. One conse quence of this innocuous seeming assumption is that there exists a set without any elements at all. Indeed, if A is a set, apply the axiom of specification to A with the sentence "x ^ x" (or, for that matter, with any other universally false sentence). The result is the set {x e A : x ^ x) , and that set, clearly, has no elements. The axiom of extension implies that there can be only one set with no elements. The usual symbol for that set is 0; the set is called the empty set. The empty set is a subset of every set, or, in other words, 0 C A for every A. To establish this, we might argue as follows. It is to be proved that every element in 0 belongs to A ; since there are no elements in 0, the condition is automatically fulfilled. The reasoning is correct but per haps unsatisfying. Since it is a typical example of a frequent phenomenon, a condition holding in the "vacuous" sense, a word of advice to the inex perienced reader might be in order. To prove that something is true about the empty set, prove that it cannot be false. How, for instance, could it be false that 0 C A. It could be false only if 0 had an element that did not belong to A. Since 0 has no elements at all, this is absurd. Conclu sion: 0 C A is not false, and therefore 0 C A for every A. 8 Sec. 3 9 UNORDERED PAIRS The set theory developed so far is still a pretty poor thing; for all we know there is only one set and that one is empty. Are there enough sets to ensure that every set is an element of some set. Is it true that for any two sets there is a third one that they both belong to. What about three sets, or four, or any number. We need a new principle of set construction to resolve such questions. The following principle is a good beginning. Axiom of pairing. For any two sets there exists a set that they both be long to. Note that this is just the affirmative answer to the second question above.