=== å— 33 ===

phasize the distinction be tween initial segments and weak initial segments, the former will be called strict initial segments. In general the words "strict" and "weak" refer to < and ^ respectively. Thus, for instance, the initial segment determined by a may be described as the set of all predecessors of a, or, for emphasis, as the set of all strict predecessors of a; similarly the weak initial segment determined by a consists of all weak predecessors of a. If x ^ y and y ^ z, we may say that y is between x and z; if x < y and y < z, then y is strictly between x and z. If x < y and if there is no element strictly between x and y, we say that x is an immediate predecessor of y, or y is an immediate suc cessor of x. If X is a partially ordered set (which may in particular be totally or dered), then it could happen that X has an element a such that a ^ x for every x in X. In that case we say that a is the least (smallest, first) element of X. The antisymmetry of an order implies that if X has a least element, then it has only one. If, similarly, X has an element a such that x ^ af or every x in X, then a is the greatest (largest, last) element of X; it too is unique (if it exists at all). The set w of all natural numbers (with its cus tomary ordering by magnitude) is an example of a partially ordered set with a first element (namely 0) but no last. The same set, but this time with the inverse ordering, has a last element but no first. In partially ordered sets there is an important distinction between least elements and minimal ones. If, as before, X is a partially ordered set, an element a of X is called a minimal element of X in case there is no element in X strictly smaller than a. Equivalently, a is minimal if x ^ a implies Sec. 14 57 ORDER that x = a. For an example, consider the collection C of non-empty sub sets of a non-empty set X, with ordering by inclusion. Each singleton is a minimal element of 6, but clearly 6 has no least element (unless X itself is a singleton). We distinguish similarly between greatest and maximal elements; a maximal element of X is an element a such that X contains nothing strictly greater than a. Equivalently, a is maximal if a iS x im plies that x = a. An element a of a partially ordered set is said to be a lower bound of a subset E of X in case a 5= x for every x in E; similarly a is an upper bound of E in case x ^ a for every x in E. A set E may have no lower bounds or upper bounds at all, or it may have many; in the latter case it could happen that none of them belongs to E. (Examples?) Let Et be the set of all lower bounds of E in X and let E* be the set of all upper bounds of E in X. What was just said is that Et may be empty, or Et (~l E may be empty. If Et fl E is not empty, then it is a singleton consisting of the unique least element of E. Similar remarks apply, of course, to E*. If it happens that the set E, contains a greatest element a (necessarily unique), then a is called the greatest lower bound or infimum of E. The abbreviations g.l.b. and inf are in common use. Because of the difficulties in pronouncing the former, and even in remembering whether g.l.b. is up (greatest) or down (lower), we shall use the latter notation only. Thus inf E is the unique element in X (possibly not in E) that is a lower bound of E and that dominates (i.e., is greater than) every other lower bound of E. The defini tions at the other end are completely parallel. If E* has a least element a (necessarily unique), then a is called the least upper bound (l.u.b.) or supre- mum (sup) of E. The ideas connected with partially ordered sets are easy to express but they take some time to assimilate. The reader is advised to manufacture many examples to illustrate the various possibilities in the behavior of partially ordered sets and their subsets. To aid him in this enterprise, we proceed to describe three special partially ordered sets with some amusing properties. (i) The set is w X w.